So in this part of the conversation I
want to talk about exercise, nutrition,
fasting, lifestyle, sleep, environmental
factors. And the first question is why
does muscle matter as a woman in
particular?
>> Muscle matters because it helps your
brain produce more neurons and that's
super important for brain health. As far
as protection as we age, it's directly
correlative to the amount of muscle that
we have. And if you have something like
PCOS or endometriosis, it's even more
important for you because building
muscle is going to fight insulin
resistance and inflammation. I've got
two questions to ask. Should women
exercise differently across the
menstrual cycle? And what is the reason
why women hear what you guys say and
they don't do it?
>> I'm so glad we're having this
conversation. We're back with the
leading voices in women's health to
unlock the specific insights, data, and
tools needed to combat the growing
challenges women face throughout their
lives. For women forever, it was all
about aesthetics. I'm healthy. I'm thin.
Because they are under the assumption
through socioultural ideas that a woman
is coming to the gym to lose weight, not
to get strong, not to gain muscle. But
what we've ended up with is an epidemic
of osteoporosis and frailty and really
dementia where 40 to 50% of women will
have low bone density. 70% of all hip
fractures happen in women. And when you
have that, 30% of the time you have a
chance of dying in one year.
>> Because most of it is based on male
data. And I see a large number of women
trying their hardest to be healthy but
what they are choosing to do is actually
having a negative impact on their
hormonal health and it's not your fault
and this is where we have to educate and
it starts now.
>> Which brings me to questions from the
audience like what's the best and
healthiest way to lose weight? Is there
a diet for fertility? Should women ask
is there a link between environmental
toxins and early menopause?
>> We think so. But also, if you were to
design perfect workout regimes for
menopause and permenopause, what would
you Oh, Stacy's clapping. Go ahead.
This is part two of my conversation with
four of the world's leading experts in
women's health. And in this episode, we
go even deeper into actionable,
practical things you can do to improve
your health. And by the way, if you're a
man and you've been sent this episode by
a girlfriend, a wife, a daughter, uh
whoever it might be, I know you might
not think this conversation is for you,
but more than 50% of this planet are
women. You have a tremendous advantage
in your relationships, at work, and just
being a human being going through life.
If you understand the majority of the
population and for so long, women's
health, women's bodies, women's anatomy,
their psychology and physiology has been
a mystery because there hasn't been the
same amount of scientific research done
to understand them. So, in this
conversation, we're going to demystify
all of that so that you can understand
your wife, your partner, your daughter,
your colleague, your mother, your
grandmother even better.
[Music]
So in this part of the conversation, I
want to talk about exercise, nutrition,
fasting, lifestyle, sleep, environmental
factors, and all the things that we kind
of alluded to when we were referencing
hormones and menopause, but in a more
actionable sense. And I guess the first
question is similar to the first
question in part one, which is why does
it matter for us to have a conversation
about women in this context versus
fitness generally or nutrition
generally? Sport and exercise science in
itself is a small subset of like sports
medicine and medical research and most
of the research has been done on men. So
if we look inherently at most of the
recommendations of exercise, recovery,
nutrition, it's based on male data and
we established earlier that's not
generalizable. So when we really want to
get into the nuances of how do we create
an adaptive stress for women, we have to
look at it differently to look through
the female lens. understand the female
physiology and acutely how hormones can
affect adaptations and how women respond
to different environmental cues than
men. Yeah, our hormones distinctly
control a lot of our environment and the
b our other cells that are not what we
think of as our hormone cells work with
our hormones. So, if we think about the
gut, we think about the liver, our
immune system. A lot of this is so
hormonally derived, but it's a two-way
street. Meaning, your hormones influence
what is happening in your gut, but your
gut influences what is happening in your
hormones. And because women have
different hormones than men as far as
what's predominant and when they are, we
have to come at this and approach it a
different way. There's so much to do
with messaging that women receive as far
as their health goes. and this, you
know, be small at any cost, you know,
you know, get to that number on the
scale. And I see it on social media that
the conversation is changing hopefully.
Now, GOP ones is tampering this a little
bit, but strong over skinny, nutrition
over calories. Like we are trying to
build bigger, stronger bodies and take
up more space
is the message that needs to have. I
mean, forever it was all about
aesthetics. You have to look young, feel
young, be young, anti-age, you know, all
those things. And what we've ended up
with now is an epidemic of osteoporosis
and frailty and and really dementia.
>> Should women exercise differently across
the menstrual cycle. So this is the
nuance and this is something if you'd
asked me maybe 5 years ago I would have
said sure from a molecular level we see
that there are certain things that
happen with estrogen
being in isolation for the most part and
then when you have estrogen progesterone
we see their metabolic shifts we see
their temperature shifts but the caveat
is we don't know if a woman ovulates or
not and I'm sure that Natalie can you
know give some stats about the an
ovulatory incidences in most women if If
we were to understand and know when an
woman ovulates in addition to how she
feels across her cycle, then she can
individually tailor her menstrual cycle
to her training. But for general plan,
we can't do that. I think it's important
that you know building muscle, using
muscle, consistency is a huge part of
effectiveness when it comes to exercise
or to building strength. And so one fear
we have when we say do this in one phase
of your cycle and do that in another
phase is that if you know 15% of
patients are not ovulating or they have
no idea when their follicular and ludial
phases are they then doing overall less
because they're waiting on this
directive to tell them what is not
untrue though and how I frame this to
patients is that strength and resistance
training should be the core of what
you're doing regardless of the phase of
the cycle you're in regardless if you're
pregnant regardless if we're doing
fertility treatments, building muscle,
using your muscle. Now, what you do on
other days is where you should allow
yourself to say, "How do I feel this
day? What do I need this day?" And be
okay with giving yourself the grace that
that may look different on your period,
in your follicular phase, in your ludial
phase, and saying something and moving
your body is still ultimately, we're all
going to agree, better than sitting on
the couch. Okay, many women will say
they have more energy in that late
follicular phase. And so if you are
looking at your workout structure, this
is a day I want to try heavier weights
or more reps, it can be smart to put
that in a time where you have a higher
chance of being successful.
>> That's how I explain it. I'm like, if
you have
>> your own data and you know what days you
feel really fantastic, that's where you
want to put your higher intensity, your
heavier lifting because you know that
you're going to hit those training
metrics. What we don't want is for
someone to go in to do a highintensity
session on days they feel flat cuz then
they won't hit the metrics that they
need to get the stimulus we're after.
>> Can you explain this to me like I'm a
10-year-old in terms of where in the
cycle typically women will have more
energy and really be able to push
themselves
>> right here 5 to 7 days before ovulation.
Some women feel really great around
ovulation. Some have a transient where
they'll feel really awful on and around
ovulation and maybe 24 hours later they
feel really fantastic. Most women are
variable through the early ludial phase.
So if we think about day 6 to 14, that's
when we see women feel really robust and
strong and feel like they can take on
the world
>> because estrogen is rising.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And you see the
physiological changes, heart rate
variability, resting heart rate,
>> your immune system is um more prone to
taking on virus and bacteria. It's not
pro-inflammatory. So you have that
working for you. Your core temperature
is lower.
>> You can ask access um carbohydrate a lot
easier. So you have more availability
for fueling to hit high intensities.
Then when we see with ovulation, like I
said, some women feel really fantastic
right around the time of ovulation
because of the estrogen surge. Some have
trans transient where they don't feel so
great. They might
>> when that follicle ruptures and the egg
is released the granulosa cells that are
surrounding it which is what actually
makes estrogen get disrupted. And so
some women feel that transient breakage
and their estrogen's dropping before it
reforms to become the corpus ludium and
make again. So you have this high peak
estrogen and then some women are really
sensitive to these hormonal changes and
they feel that drop. So that ovulation
day may not always be your very best
feeling day, which makes women feel like
it should be and like something's wrong
with them.
>> On a side note, we did um survey on
women experiencing pain on ovulation
because it's something that was never
talked about.
>> Middle schmirts.
>> Yes, exactly. Middles.
>> Middles.
>> We had So you can feel the follicle
rupturing and that's called middle. So
it's German for in the middle because it
tends to happen in the middle of your
cycle when you ovulate.
>> And it's a it it's painful.
>> It's a pain. It can't be painful.
It's like a cyst bursting inside your
body.
>> And then some women are down for the
count because of it. So they can't they
don't plan any physical activity around
that because they just can't from a
physical and mental standpoint put
themselves through anything. So that's
why I'm saying like ovulation some women
feel bulletproof. Other women have this
transient feeling of really flatness and
pain. And then afterwards in these early
ludial phase, so day 16 to about day 22,
it's variable. Well, some women will
feel like on top of the world still.
Other women will feel m I can't quite
hit eye intensities. And then in general
these few days about day 24 to 27 before
those hormones actually drop this is
where you have your PMS your
premenstrual syndrome and cramping and
fatigue and a lot of women are like not
so great.
>> That's when your progesterone
>> when both of them drop. I just love how
you guys explain it because what I see
on social media is absolutes. You must
do this doing ficular. You must do this
at ovulation. you must and I'm just like
really you know and so I love how you're
like well some women it may affect them
this way and others this we generally
tend to see xyz so rather than like you
absolutely have to do this at these
different times I think learning to
listen to your body and the signals that
it's giving you I mean across the stages
of your life that's that's really key to
so many of the questions that we're
talking about because you want to
understand your own response and where
many women are falling short is that
they've been suppressing their cycle, so
they don't know about it. And they were
not taught all of these different
changes that are perfectly normal. And
so it's very hard to then hear a social
media post that says only do this in the
follicular phase and don't ever do
cardio in the ludial phase. And you get
a lot of mixed messages when in fact
there's no absolutes.
>> No.
>> And in terms of training, some people
think moderate training is better for
women. Some people think high intensity
training is better throughout the cycle.
and sort of also considering what goals
you might have in fertility. What would
you say there is is should I be doing
highintensity interval training if I'm a
woman or throughout the cycle and
throughout my life?
>> So this is where we have to think about
periodization first lifestyle but also
how a woman is feeling. We don't want
people to do highintensity interval
training every day because that's just
not going to create an adaptive
response. We have to think about the
reason why we're exercising is to create
a a stress that the body's going to
respond to. We don't get fitter during
exercise. We get fitter from the
stimulus of exercise and the recovery
from it. So, if someone's doing
highintensity interval training every
day or 5 days a week, they're not ever
going to get that subsequent recovery to
be able to hit those high intensities
and that stress that we want. We talk
about high intensity during our
reproductive years. you can pretty much
get away with whatever you want to do
during your rep reproductive years
because you have the benefit of our
hormones working for us. We start
getting into pmenopause and we start
getting into menopause. This is where we
have to really carefully look at volume
versus intensity. So that means if we're
doing lots of stuff or are we doing
really purposeful high intensity versus
low intensity because we're trying to
create what we call a polarization of
the training so that when we hit high
intensities we're actually hitting the
intensities we need to create change.
But on the other side of it we want to
hit really low intensity so that we can
have recovery. It gets harder to recover
as we get older regardless if you're
male or female. But in pmenopause, we
don't have the benefit of estrogen
supporting anti-inflammatory responses.
So we have to be very cognate that we
need more recovery. So I'll give you an
example. So my office, my orthopedic
office is in a fabulous performance
center. Outside my windows, I have floor
to ceiling windows. There's a football
field inside. That field is filled seven
days a week with people taking a class I
called Ignite.
Ignite has a lot of midlife women in it
who are never exercising at low enough
intensity to recover
and never exercising at peak intensity
to change their body. So what happens
five or seven days a week they're out
doing moderate mid-range
intensity training but they're not
seeing body changes. They're not seeing
recomposition. They're hurt every three
weeks and in my office wondering why
they're hurt because they're doing a lot
of reps of medium intensity. So, they're
not really recovering and they're not
intense enough to really change their
physiology. But that's really common.
There are whole brands built around
mid-intensity
and
>> and that falls into the whole
socioultural thing where we've grown up
that if you don't have a good sweat sesh
and feel completely smashed when you
leave, it wasn't a good workout. But
that's a misconception,
>> right? So they are smashed. They're
dripping as sweat, but
>> it's not at peak heart rate ranges for
short bursts of time, right? So it's I
know. Look, it's very confusing because
I don't know 20 years people have as
they've switched from only cardio,
they're like now we're going to do high
intensity, which is fine. I'm not
opposed to that word. It's just that how
do you define that? What is high
intensity? And so like you, because I've
read your books, that we're we're
exercising people at pretty low heart
rate where they're about to flip from
burning fat to carbohydrates cuz that's
really metabolically healthy, but not so
intense that people are going to get
hurt. And I also prescribe really peak
sprint interval training. And I did that
myself in midlife, you know, to
recompose my body, sprint interval
training because it's intense and
lifting, right?
>> Is the advice different for different
women at different stages of life here?
So, if I'm if I'm before pmenopause,
>> you get away with most stuff.
>> Assuming you have a regular menstrual
cycle, right? I think there there's
different time periods which we've
mentioned before PCOS, hypothalamic
amenorhea, time periods where you're not
making estrogen or making it reliably,
you can get away with less. And so we
want to protect a little bit of that.
But when it comes to exercise,
variety is the name of the game. You
want to adapt. So you shouldn't be doing
the same thing every day. That doesn't
mean you can't have a plan. There's
seven days in a week. You don't have to
move every single one. But you should
pick these different activities based on
your life, your schedule, what you want
to accomplish. And it it will vary some
in different phases of your life because
your goals are going to be different.
And so when it comes to exercise, we
always have to think about what needs to
happen. Are you somebody who is
overweight and needs to lose weight? Are
you somebody who's underweight and is
trying to gain weight? Are you trying to
get pregnant or going through fertility
treatments or in menopause? So there's
nuance to it which always makes it hard.
But there's not a one do this one
exercise every single day. That's pretty
much not the answer.
>> So the most popular class for females
right now, I just saw the statistic
somewhere is Pilates. And my daughter
loves her lree and gets on that machine.
It's like, you know,
>> where does that fall in all of this?
>> I have a lot of um Pilates.
>> There's a social aspect to it. You know,
there's people hate.
>> Yeah. because um we did this real
talking about how Pilates was not
appropriate as strength training,
especially as a rehab. When we look at
Pilates, it's a complement to true
strength training. What I mean by true
strength training is you're lifting a
load that's heavy in multiple planes.
With Pilates, it's really good for
isometric control, core strength,
balance, propriception, but it isn't a
stress that's going to create adequate
muscle gain and strength of the bone,
which is what we want from strength
training. So, just like yoga, Pilates
has a place. It does definitely fit in
the scheme of things, especially from
the social and the fact that it does
give you control and propriception, but
it isn't the beall end all for strength.
people that do pilateses frequently will
be shouting.
>> But I'm see it's so it hurts so much and
>> I know I hear
>> well I'm sure it's hard the times I've
done it it's not easy but the
>> but it doesn't uh set you up not to be
frail.
>> Mhm.
>> It is not building strength and power.
And I have women who have done so many
Pilates 1500. It's like a badge of they
count their classes.
>> 1,500 at the deficit of anything else.
It's all that goes on
>> and and I think that is another, you
know, you got to mix it up. Number one.
Number two, I say the same thing. So,
I'm not very popular in those crowds,
but it's great for the for the standard
that I ask people do of of flexibility
and joint range of motion so that you
don't become really stiff and hunched
over and shuffling old person, but it
will never give you strength and power
in the way to protect yourself from
falling down
>> because there's not enough weight
>> for the most part. Yes. And we also have
to think about when you're doing
strength training, you are in uh you're
creating a multidirectional force
through the muscle and the tendons and
the bones. With Pilates, especially if
you're looking at the reformer, it's not
multi-directional in the movements. It
each movement is one plane and you can
be
>> yeah, you can be in in different planes,
but each motion isn't multiplaner.
>> So if we think about what are we trying
to get out of out of Pilates, we're
getting neuromuscular control. We're
getting core strength, we're getting
some breath work, and all that is
beneficial. But again, if we're trying
to grow muscle and bone, take up space,
be strong, it doesn't quite hit the
points that we need to in order to
create this new strength to bring us to
that health span that women are looking
for.
>> So do it a couple times a week.
>> Yeah.
>> Not seven days a week. Correct.
>> So if my my partner, she's 33 years old,
so she's not quite at per menopause yet.
If you were to design a perfect workout
regime for her at that phase of her
life, what would you Oh, Stacy's
clapping,
>> you know. Go ahead.
>> So, if she has three days that she can
go to the gym and has, oh, I should say
three 1-hour sessions that she could
have at the gym in a week over seven
days. Each one would start with
mobilization. So using resistance bands
or maybe you're doing a Pilates reformer
warm-up so you're getting through the
range of motion.
>> Why?
>> Just to open up the joint capsules, make
sure you don't have any restriction so
that you can get really good range of
motion for the movements you're going to
do next.
>> The next movements would be
>> does that stuff actually work? I do
wonder this. So many of my friends are
getting injured at this age because that
they're my age and a bit older because
they walk into the gym and they start
picking weights up.
>> Oh yeah. No, I mean I spend more time
mobilizing, I think, than I do actually
training now,
>> just to keep range of motion going and
keep the joint capsules open. And so
that's using the heavy resistance bands
to distend and distract all the joint
capsules to increase range of motion.
>> Stretching doesn't do that. Stretching
will get to an end point of the muscle
to allow you to have more flex in the
muscle, but it's not actually stretching
in the joint capsule to give you range
of motion. So when we talk about
mobility work, we want to get into that
full range of motion. So if you have a
stiffening, so as I was saying earlier
about the guy and my voodoo flossing,
well voodoo floss is a way where you're
creating some blood flow restriction,
then you go in a range of motion and
that blood flow restriction, you take
the voodoo band off and the blood flow
comes back and you go in the range of
motion get deeper in that range of
motion. So, it's all about accessing the
tissues and making the tissues more
viable for increased range of motion so
that when you go do the lifting, when
you go put on a heavier load, you have
better control, better range of motion
and avoid the small little sticky points
that cause injury.
>> Tears. The micro tears.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh so it's the micro tears that are
going to lead to in injury and the micro
tears come when I haven't warmed up
>> warmed up properly. Yeah. So, like
shoulder, what would that look like?
>> Or your shoulder. Uh I wish I had a rig.
So, you can take one of those thick um
the big and wrap it around a rig or or
something and you can pull and distend.
So, you're actually pulling the shoulder
out
>> in different ranges. So, you can rotate,
roll, pull, extend, pull, extend.
>> What about this?
>> So, this is more trying to work the
muscle, right? And you have paleo press
as well where you're working rotation,
but that's not getting into the joint.
>> So you want to be
>> So if you're distending, you're pulling
back. You're not bending your elbow.
You're actually pulling through the
shoulder and distracting.
And then the band is going to pull you
forward to give you resistance to pull
your shoulder joint out. And it's not a
painful, but you're just really getting
into that full joint capsule. You can do
that with the hips. You can do a banded
pigeon stretch. just so many different
ways of getting into the joint capsule,
which not only gives you more range of
motion and prevents injury, but it also
gives you more of the flexibility that
people think they get when they're
stretching. The reason this is important
as we age is because ligaments and
tendons and uh the capsule the inside
skin of a joint is made of collagen and
the covealent bonding collagen is like
if you envision strands of rope the
covealent bonding meaning the bonding
between those strands becomes stronger
as you age and you uh become more and
more stiff. Well, when we lose joint
range of motion, we're injured more. Um,
it's why we start shuffling down the
street, hunched over, shuffling instead
of striding because we have full hip
range of motion or full knee range of
motion. And so, one reason to do this is
to maintain full range of motion through
all of our joints. We want full range of
motion not only to avoid injury but for
instance if your knee is stiff whether
it's an injury or because you just
haven't maintained your motion it will
change something called your kinetic
chain meaning we really are from our big
toe to through our spine connected the
big toes connected to the footbone the
footbone because the way each of those
body segments works activates the next
body segment. So, if you've got a glitch
in the system because your knee doesn't
move or let's take this one, this is
easier. Your ankles get stiff because
we've never worked on it. Your calves
are tight, right? You're a jumper.
You've got tight calves. Your your hip
your ankle doesn't flex. Well, then your
shin bone or your tibia is not going to
internally rotate. Well, without that,
your knee is not going to bend as much
and your femur, your thigh bone is not
going to rotate. You must have the
rotation of these bones to activate your
glute.
>> So if you're not activating your glute,
your butt muscle,
people are very hurt or they're not
getting as strong or they start having
lateral thigh pain. So everything works
together and it starts with among other
things
the flexibility and range of motion
exercises. We're talking about it right
now. So that the body works like a
chain.
I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way, you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you. If I lose my range of motion
because I never did all these things,
can I get it back when I'm 50? So, like,
you know, I'm 33 now and I'm think,
damn, I've not been doing enough of this
stuff.
>> Yeah. Yeah, you can. Unless you're
having bone changes due to arthritis and
it's blocked. Yes, you can.
>> So, I can start I could theoretically
start at 40
>> cuz if you think about your muscle and
how it responds to picking up a weight
and right, you're going to build the
muscle. So if you're creating a force
within the tendon and the ligament and
the collagen and it's a repetitive
force, a positive force, you're going to
invoke change.
>> Tissues are malleable.
>> So people that think they're stiff and
they say, you know, I can't touch my
toes and
>> they can work on
>> they can get it back.
>> Here's another reason. So what happens
in midlife men and women actually they
remember what they used to do
>> and then they're like I'm going to start
working out and I'm going to start
>> their success.
>> This is when I get people who just show
up on the basketball court after not
having been there for quite some time
and they return to their memories of
success but because they haven't
lengthened their tendons, their joints
aren't moving quite so well. They
rupture tendons because the load
outstrips the ability of the tissue to
be compliant.
>> That makes sense.
>> Friends have been getting injured and I
think that's in part why because they're
trying to work out like they used to
work out.
>> Yeah. And listen, they can return to
really high level, but you can't stop.
You can't start where you left off 20
years ago or 10 years ago. It takes a
minute.
>> Few weeks for me.
>> It takes a minute. Yeah. So Mel's 33.
You
>> mobility work when she gets to the gym
first and foremost.
>> Y
>> on day one
>> or every day?
>> Every day.
>> Every day. So I'm assuming, and I could
be wrong, that she already has a
strength training history.
>> Yeah, she does. Yeah.
>> Okay. So we do the mo mobility work for
about 10 minutes. Really warm up. Well,
then we pick one compound movement we're
going to work on. So could be squats on
the Monday. So we're going to work on
loading in a squat pattern. So that's
your knee forward, you know, quad
dominant type squat motion.
>> Back squat, does it matter?
>> Back squat, front squat. You could do
Bulgarian split squats. So we're adding
load and we have a periodized program.
So this is just a snippet of one day in
a periodized program.
>> What if you didn't have that strength
training history?
>> Well, then we work on adding load
through our I want to see how she moves
first and we want to make sure that
you're moving well before you add load.
So this is where we would work with
lighter loads and more reps.
>> What if she's doesn't have you there?
>> Yeah, that was my question. Like what if
you're not there on her own?
>> Yeah. So this is still like how do you
squat? Where are your sticking points?
So you can assess, self assess. If
you've done your mobility, then you'll
know like, oh, my hips really tight, so
I need to work on that. So let me do
some air squats to see how I move. Then
the next time you go in to do squats,
maybe you're picking up um two 10 pound
dumbbells and you're holding them and
doing air squats with your dumbbells.
And eventually you're gonna move to the
barbell. So it's all about small
progression under load to get to a point
where you feel more confident to use a
barbell back squat to get into more of
those compound movements.
>> Why don't people exercise? Specifically,
if we just focus here on women, what is
the reason why people hear what you guys
say when you're talking about exercise
and they don't do it? They don't start.
>> It's hard.
>> For what what set of reasons make it
hard?
>> Well, for women, it's set up in a
gendered environment. Like I always use
the example of a woman who has an
interest in strength training. if they
go to a typical like 24-hour fitness or
another brand gym that's out there,
they'll walk in and they'll say, "Yep, I
want to join." And the membership person
most often will say, "Great. Here's the
class schedule. This is where we have
our spin classes. This is where we do
our our
classes."
>> They never direct them to the lifting
platforms. They never look and say,
"Hey, here are are the way to get
strong." Because they are under the
assumption through socioultural ideas
that a woman is coming to the gym to
lose weight, not to get strong, not to
gain muscle,
>> not to recomposition. Yeah.
>> Right. But if a man walks in, then it's
always the great, here's the lifting
platforms, we have x amount of barbells,
we have x amount of bumper plates. How
much weight do you want to gain? Do you
do you want to work with someone to, you
know, help you build that mass?
>> Vonda, why does it matter?
You know, cuz there's a big social
pressure on women to look a certain way
>> and it doesn't typically involve muscles
in the especially in the upper body.
>> Yeah.
>> So, you know, we're still living under
the times of be as small as you can,
>> but small doesn't mean lean. There's a
concept of skinny fat which you know
it's you can be as tiny as tiny but you
can be 50 you can have a body fat of 50%
which means you're neither strong you're
not metabolically healthy you're just
little right
>> so it's there is also a misconception
that lifting heavy is going to
automatically turn you into a physique
model or a bodybuilder shape
if that's your goal that's probably
going to take you five years or a
decade. It's a lot of hard work for a
long period of time with proper
nutrition. So for a woman who's
wants to feel better, the goal is to
build muscle to be lean, to recompose,
not lose weight, right? I'm not really
interested in somebody's weight. I'm
interested in their body fat percentage
and their lean muscle mass.
>> Um
because it's what you're made of that
matters, right? Not the size of the
shell.
>> And why does muscle matter as I age? As
a woman in particular,
>> it matters for everyone, but for uh
muscle matters because it's not just
part of locomotion. It's not just part
of moving you around. It is a metabolic
organ. It is critical for glucose
metabolism. It's critical for uh insulin
sensitivity. It uh talks to the bone.
Bone and bone and muscle are endocrine
organs which cross communicate all the
time. So both bone and muscle have
access to the brain. Right? Uh muscle
will produce a hormone called irri which
has multiple functions in the body.
The the axis between muscle and brain
helps your brain produce more neurons.
Right? bones access to the brain has a
role in satiety. Isn't that amazing?
Which means not hungry anymore. Why
would you think these locomotive
structures, if that's what you limit
them to, would would even have those
functions? It's because we put organs in
a box. So to answer your question,
muscle in men and women, but women in
particular for this conversation, we
need as much muscle as possible to fight
the insulin resistance that we get when
estrogen walks out the door. We need uh
muscle for glucose metabolism. We need
muscle for the pure strength of it
because
we do not want to become frail and be
one of the twothirds of nursing home
residents who are women because we can't
do something as simple as get up out of
a chair.
>> But I could just get muscle when I'm 70.
>> You can actually harder.
>> So why does it matter for Mel to be
thinking about it when she's 33?
>> Well, here's the great part for Mel is
she still has all her estrogen. Mhm.
>> Estrogen has a profound effect on muscle
protein synthesis. Um it is a
significant anti-inflammatory.
So high inflammation, chronic
inflammation, we've talked about
decreases muscle synthesis. It decreases
bone synthesis because inflammation with
its high cytoine level I've mentioned
them before IL6 tumor crosis factor
those are all detrimental to these
normal metabolic pathways. So the
wonderful thing for Mel who is entering
what I call the critical decade which is
35 to 45 estimated. It's the prime time
to set your physical activity standards
and to build as much as you can while
you still got all your estrogen.
>> In addition to the fact that for proper
hormonal health, you think about
inflammation coming in, it's like static
on a walkie-talkie. The brain's trying
to interpret your hormones and when
inflammation's coming in, it's making
the signals really hard to hear. So, we
need to make sure that we're actively
fighting that. And building muscle is
one great way because it's going to use
up glucose and fight insulin resistance,
which means makes your cells more
sensitive to when it sees glucose and
able to use it better. If you have
another thing that is pro-inflammatory
such as PCOS or endometriosis,
it's even more important for you because
your inflammatory burden by default of
what's happening at a cellular level is
higher. We now need to not just say, I
need to not make it worse by being
exposed to things. We have to say, I
need a plan to fight this because my
world is pro-inflammatory on a daily
basis. What is my game plan to fight
this? And building muscle. It's not just
exercise is better than no exercise but
specifically building muscle because as
everybody's saying it's has a metabolic
function in your body is going to help
you the most. There's a term called
geroprotective geroproction. So gerero
is is the term we use for aging. So
gerontology is the you know the part of
medicine that focuses on the elderly
patients. And so when we look on in
females and the organs that are, you
know, are the most ger protective, it is
the muscle and the ovary and the ovaries
go away. We have a shelf life in our
ovaries. So then we're just really left
with our muscle as far as protecting us
in those elderly years as we age. And
it's directly correlative to the amount
of muscle that we have because if you
have a lot of muscle, you're going to
have stronger bones.
And this this is where the intensity
part where um Dr. I was talking about
seeing the ignite class and everyone's
in that moderate intensity all the time.
With moderate intensity, you don't have
the post exercise anti-inflammatory
response. So, if we're trying to build
muscle and we're trying to dampen
inflammation if we're always doing this
moderate intensity cardio, then we're
not one going to be building the muscle
we want and two we're going to have this
baseline elevation of total body
inflammation. So we need to mix it up
and have that precedence on being muscle
centric and building that muscle
>> one to help with aesthetics. I mean
that's the byproduct of lifting weights.
You tend to look better but it's more
than that. We see it improves brain
health because of the neuro connections
and the neuroplasticity of the brain and
I told
>> sleep all of those things you get an
incredible parasympathetic response when
you've done a significant heavy lifting
session or a sprint interval session
which you don't get with that moderate
intensity cardiovascular work.
>> Two questions to add to what you you're
about to say here is um am I right in
thinking that
>> at the end of that golden decade that
you referenced 45 years old
Because you have changes in estrogen,
one will expect to see a a natural
decline in muscle.
>> Yes.
>> Um and an increased chance of
osteoporosis, osteopenia, bone issues
later in life? Do women, this is several
questions, I apologize, but do women
then also tend to have more frail bones
in later life and is that linked to the
muscle loss?
>> So this is how it works. So both men and
women build bone and peak about up to 25
some sometimes 30 and then bone loss
plateaus for a little while. Men
continue to lose about 1% a year. So men
do not arrive with hip fractures or
devastating fractures
until their 70s or 80s or older. Women
also decline slowly until we lose our
estrogen. And then the rate of decline,
and I'll tell you why it happens, for
bone doubles or triples such that you
will lose 15 to 20% of your bone density
during your pmenopausal period just from
loss of estrogen alone because estrogen
plays many roles. I've already talked
about estrogen being a huge
anti-inflammatory. Bones are very
sensitive to inflammatory chemicals in
your body.
Estrogen also directly affects the
balance of the two main cells that
subtract minerals from bone, the
osteoclast
and the cell that builds the bone, the
osteoblast. And in well hormoned times,
there is a balance. The body loves
balance. We take what we need, we build
it back. But because estrogen has such a
profound effect on the osteoclast, the
Pac-Man bone eating cell,
there's a dis there's an imbalance and
we take more bone than we're capable of
building. We're still building bone, but
the rate cannot keep up with this. So
with the inflammation,
with the direct effects on the
osteoclass,
women will lose bone density if they do
nothing. Well, number one, they're going
to lose bone density, but they must do
something about it. The reason it's so
critical
for a 33y old is because you still have
your estrogen. So, let's learn how to
lift heavy. Let's take advantage of the
estrogen circulating. Let's learn to
have a jumping practice and impact our
bones. Right? So the the way our body
tells our bones to build more is um
there's another little cell called the
osteocy. It sits encased in bone but
it's connected to these other uh cells
by little tunnels that contain fluid.
When you jump, the biomechanical impulse
of that fluid shifting in the little
tunnels is translated into a biochemical
stimulation that tells the bone, "Oh my
god, she's jumping around. I need to
build more bone." So, we need that
impact to stimulate the laying down of
more bone.
>> I was looking at this graph, which is
what you were describing.
>> Yeah. um men and women aren't that far
away in terms of
bone mass.
>> So this is showing the fact that because
of the way testosterone interacts with a
man's bones, he will peak at a higher
bone mass than a woman will.
>> Yeah.
>> So he's starting at a higher level.
>> So I would want young women to do
everything humanly possible to start at
the highest possible level. But I see
lots of 20 year olds, 30 year olds,
really young women with poor bone
density for a lot of reasons. And so I'm
a big proponent for having bones
measured early. Don't wait until you're
old so you know where you're starting,
>> but that's not the standard
recommendation.
>> No, the standard recommendation is 65,
which
>> long way
>> for that. But because I do do either a
DEXA scan or a REM's ultrasound to look
at bone quality on everybody, um, we can
catch it earlier. And that's really
important to get in front of it because
it's estimated, uh, research says that
in order to affect bone density, if
you're going to use estrogen for
instance, you need to have do it for 10
years.
>> And why should people care about bone
density? Everyone cares about muscles,
but very few people talk about bones.
>> Fracture. can't carry your muscle around
if you have weak bones.
>> So without bone, muscle is just a
heaping pile of steaming metabolic
tissue sitting there, right? There would
be no bicep to complement, right?
Because it has to be connected to a
bone. So they're important for
locomotion and giving support to the
muscle. But bone is an endocrine organ
that secretes hormones that go to your
brain to help build neurons to your
pancreas to be active in insulin uh
release to the muscle for glucose
metabolism. In men to the testes to
build testosterone and that's only one
of the many hormones that the bone
produces. The bone is not not only
structural, not only hormonal. I've
already talked about it being a
storehouse, but it's an incubator in our
pelvis is where we build all of our
blood cells.
>> Mhm.
>> And so it has these multifunctions.
But to Mary Claire's point, for women,
40 to 50% of women will have low bone
density. And when you have that, 50% of
the time you'll break a bone. So if
we're looking around at this table, if
we all have osteoporosis, which we
don't, uh, one in two of us will
fracture. When that fracture is a hip
fracture, which is very common, 70% of
all hip fractures happen in women.
30% of the time when you hit the floor
and something breaks, you have a chance
of dying in one year. This quick, your
life changes. 50% of the time, even if
you survive, you will never return to
prefall function, meaning you can't go
home. And that puts your family in this
situation of having to figure out
24-hour care
>> or you move in with your eldest daughter
or you go into a facility where you use
your life savings until you have no more
and then you have to apply for Medicaid
and the government will pay for it.
These are terrible situations
to get at something that we could have
prevented had we started early enough.
>> So, you want to start early. So, I'll
have Mel. So, Mel's going to be doing
strength training, not just for the
muscle benefits, but also because it's
going to help her build strong, healthy
bones in that critical decade.
>> Yep. And then we finish it with some
jump training.
>> Jump training.
>> Yeah. So plyometric type work or if
we're looking at not having the
robustness of doing straight pio then
you can do banded assisted pogos. You
can do low depth jumps so you're getting
some impact the bone because as um Dr.
Roy is talking about it's a
multidirectional stress not people think
oh I run I'm going to have strong bones
but running doesn't do it. You need
multidirectional stress. So if you think
about it when you land your body has to
move the ground doesn't. So it's called
the ground reaction force that comes up
through the bone to create that
strength.
>> So that ideal situation in a workout for
her would be some mobility, some heavy
lifting. If we're doing plyio, that's
also strength or a sprint type training.
So you're getting a metabolic stress. So
you're hitting all the major factors in
one 1-hour workout. I read that um that
there was a study done with some
Australian elderly ladies on bone growth
>> on lifting and bone growth.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. Lift more lift more study by Dr.
Beck.
>> Yes.
>> She was trying to dispel the myth which
I hear every day that you've got
osteoporosis, you can't lift weights.
>> Yes.
>> And so her study because we're big
proponents of teaching people to
progressively lift heavier and heavier
and that scares people. but especially
if you think you're going to break. So
she did a study where the load was five
reps, five sets under a supervised
situation. So five reps means that it
was heavy enough that at five reps they
were near failure.
>> Right? So these women all osteoporotic
not only were capable of lifting heavy
under supervision, none of them broke
and uh they built bone.
>> Yep.
So that answers the question, right? Can
you lift? Yes.
>> Yes, you can. And the other thing that
isn't really brought up into these
conversations is when you hit
pmenopause, not only is estrogen sort of
the stimulus for sat satellite cell
where we're building muscle cell, but it
has a distinct um I guess influence on
measin. So meosin and actin are are two
contractile proteins. So if you think
about a sliding filament or coming
together, you have meosin and actin that
bond together to then pull and move and
pull and move and that's how you have a
muscle contraction. Estrogen is
responsible for how tightly meosin bonds
to actin. When we start to lose estrogen
or we start to have variability in our
estrogen, we get myosin dysfunction. So
that means we're not going to get a very
strong contraction.
>> So we get weaker.
>> We get weaker. And this is one of the
very first things that people complain
about to me. I don't have power. I don't
have strength. I can't I my grip
strength's gone. I don't know. But their
body composition hasn't changed yet. So
if we think about lifting heavier loads,
it's a neuromuscular response. And that
direct stimulus creates the adaptive
change in measin that now estrogen isn't
responsible for. It's a different
external stress that creates that change
in measin to go, yep, I have to grab
onto actin and have a very strong
contraction. So we see that this
dysfunction happens first before we
start seeing a change in our lean mass
development. So if we are already in the
habit of lifting heavier loads, then we
can offshoot some of that measin
dysfunction that occurs with the
estrogen change. So when my patients
come in and they are looking to prevent
osteoporosis or they've gotten a
diagnosis of low bone density, you know,
what can they do? I've discussed the
Lyftmore trial. The new study just came
out May of this year of 2025 and they
looked at very similar to the protocol
used in Lyftmore. So there was a control
group where they just did nothing. Then
a group that did the they did three days
a week and they did resistance training
and jump training. And then the third
group did all the same exercises and
added HRT. And depending if they had a
uterus, they got estrogen or estrogen
plus a progesterrogen. And so, of
course, as expected, the do nothing
group lost bone. You gained bone as
expected in the resistance group, but it
seemed to be synergistic. When we added
hormone therapy and the resistance
training together, they grew even more
bone. They had even better results. So,
when my patients are like, I want to
hedge my bets. My mother fell and
fractured. she's broken her hip in a
nursing home, whatever. And I'm trying
to avoid this. I'm we're hitting all the
points and the only medication of it.
Now, we have other medicines that will
help slow down resorption of bone, the
bisphosphinates and stuff, but they, you
know, there they can be hard to take and
they have a lot of side effects. So, to
me, prevention is always better than
cure,
>> right? So, I'm trying to get them and
get them early. I just ignore the
guidelines that say you have to wait
till 65 unless you have some chronic
medical condition to get a bone density.
I'm telling patients you can find it for
about $99 around I work in Houston and
that is worth the investment for you to
go get your baseline bone density. I
don't know a single orthopedic surgeon
you know a singer exercise physiologist
or anybody who deals with with
osteoporosis who thinks 65 is a good
idea. So if your listeners are like oh
well you know my insurance won't pay for
it. I'm like, there are centers popping
up now where you can go and get a DEXA
scan
>> and just pay out of pocket and get a
great, you know, and figure out where
your starting base is.
>> A DEXA scan is
>> a bone scan to see your bone density is
the easiest way to describe it
>> and your muscle mass.
>> Yeah,
>> they can do that as well. This
conversation is really important though
to extend besides just menopause or
permenopause that there are women of
reproductive age years who have profound
periods of low estrogen who are also at
risk for serious problems with their
bone density both now and down the road.
And so if you come to me and you say,
"Oh, I haven't had a period for 7 years.
No big deal." Well, that is a big deal.
And depending on the reason why, many of
the causes will result that you had low
estrogen and you were not ovulating and
you have hit that graph you showed of
while you're building your bone, that
person's on a different trajectory. And
those women do need bone scans much
earlier so that we can see where they
are and see what treatment we need. But
it's one of the biggest reasons. Bone
health is one of the most acceptable
medical reasons for why we should put
younger women who are have low estrogen
time periods onto estrogen treatment
because it can so profoundly change
their bone health long term. So in my uh
niche of active women, we see there's a
very very high incidence of recreational
active women and low energy
availability, meaning they're not eating
enough to support daily life as well as
their training. So the subclinical
aspect of not eating enough creates a
myriad of of issues that does create
lower bone density, menstrual cycle
dysfunction, greater inflammatory
responses. So you know the end result
would be hypothalamic amenora. So their
periods have stopped which is a low
estrogen standpoint. So, you know,
keeping track of of your period, make
sure you're eating enough is one of the
first stop gaps that we have in the
athletic realm. It's like we want you to
eat enough. And if you're looking at
bookending our calories on either end of
the day, that's not appropriate. We have
to look at how your circadian rhythm
works because the circadian rhythm, like
we talked about in the first um half,
was about the pulses of our hormones. So
if we're holding our calories on either
end of the day, then there's this big
space in the middle of the day where
your body thinks it's under a starvation
threat. So you start to have this down
downturn of all of our metabolic
functions. We see after 4 days of low
energy availability, there's a direct
impact on thyroid function. So we have
to be very cognate that women who are
saying, "I haven't had a period in seven
years or my periods are really
irregular." We have to bring it back to
the energy function as well. So, I know
unfortunately we're still in this
environment of aesthetics and I'm always
like, we need to eat. And if you eat in
and around your training and fueling
appropriately for what you're doing, it
has a positive impact on body
composition.
>> You're not going to gain body fat,
you're going to gain lean mass, you're
going to gain bone, and you're going to
see a decrease in body fat. But it's a
trusting the process that out in general
socioultural concepts is just not
acceptable for so many women right now.
>> And with that exercise regime I asked
you to make for a woman that's pre
premenopause.
>> Was there anything left off there? We
had day one which is mobility works
strength training.
>> So if you were to do three days a week
in the gym that would be pretty similar
except for the compound movement. What
are we doing for each of those compound
movements? A different muscle. So it
would be the knee forward squat motion
one day, push pull upper body next, and
then uh posterior, so your hip thrust,
your deadlifts, that kind of stuff.
Because women are quad dominant to
prevent injury, we really need to build
the posterior chain. And this is your
glutes, your hamstrings,
>> your deadlifts,
>> your Yeah. So you're getting really uh
strong around the knee joints, the hip
joints because again that feeds forward
to better movement, movement economy and
prevention of a misstep for a hip
fracture later down.
>> What about cardio? And
>> so that's where like if we're looking at
those three days a week and we're
finishing with pio or some sprint work,
then the other days just walking, lowle
intensity walking or maybe you have soul
food, you want to go for a bike ride,
you want to go for a run. If you're not
training specifically for something,
then those three strength training days
are your key workouts and then you can
pepper in all the other things that you
like to do.
>> I hear a lot about V2 maxes, so I
thought but we should all be driving our
cardiovascular performance up to get a
high V2 max.
>> Well, that's where the intensity is.
Yeah,
>> I think it's only I mean, and correct me
if I'm wrong, but my understanding after
reading and watching everything is
doesn't take that much to build V2 max.
doesn't it's that high intensity that's
a little bit uncomfortable where you're
pushing at that max for uh you know
about four minutes to build that V2
in the sports science world it's always
been the 4x4 the Norwegian 4x4
>> 4 minutes on four minutes off four
minutes on four minutes
>> but that's not three days a week no
>> protocol is once a week
>> once a week at the most right
>> and the other sprints just to give you I
tend to give my examples because it
makes it more real but When I'm doing
sprint intervals,
um, I do it the 30 seconds on and then
complete recovery, meaning I'm for 30
seconds I'm taking my heart rate as high
as I can get it
>> and then I'll completely recover, which
takes me two to three minutes.
I just happen to do it on a treadmill,
but the reality is you can do it on
anything. It's a heart rate function,
not an apparatus function. So, for me,
on a treadmill, after I'm done warming
up, you can't do it cold or you'll hurt
something.
>> Exactly.
>> After I'm done warming up, cuz I'm a
really short person, I punch the
treadmill up to 11 and I am just working
so hard I don't fly off the back. But
that gets my heart rate up really high,
about 186. Everybody's top heart rate is
different.
>> And then I completely recover. And I do
that four times.
>> And that's all you need.
>> It doesn't take that long. And you feel
so good when you're done.
>> Yeah. So I can't run at the moments.
This morning I did explosive kettle bell
swings.
>> Why can't you run at the moment?
>> Uh torn hamstring and miniscus. So I
can't run at the moment.
>> Running is in.
>> Run clubs have come
>> in strong. It's back in.
>> It's not happening.
Are you at all concerned with the fact
that people are running all the time and
doing resistance training less? Because
running is cool like cool now. It's how
people date. It's it's they're not going
to nightclubs.
>> It's a sacrifice of other things. It's
like we said about Pilates, you know, if
all you do is running, then that is
definitely not the best way to be. It's
not the healthiest for your whole body.
It's not that you're unhealthy, but
we're really talking about how are we
optimizing your body and your hormonal
health for a variety of different goals.
But also, if we look very micro at
running, 58% of runners have a ludal
phase defect. That means that the second
half of their menstrual cycle is not
going to be able to last as long as we
want it to. Likely due to what Stacy was
talking about earlier, this relative
energy deficiency coming back to the
brain. the brain signals not as strong
to keep that corpus ludium what happens
after the follicle alive and a lot of
women say I still have my period so I'm
okay but if we're using our cycle as a
vital sign we can actually say the ratio
of energy balance is not great and it's
often because we're doing it at
sacrifice of other things. So, if you're
doing the strength training three times
a week and you're running, however,
you're spacing out your other days,
that's such a healthy balance. It's hard
that you're going to be in a bad
position with that and you'll actually
improve your running more so than if you
were to run every day or every other
day. Cuz if you're getting strong
through full range of motion, then that
feeds forward to better running economy.
Then you can vary your pace without
getting injured. But for people who are
running every day and they're shuffling
and they're getting stronger in their
strong muscles and weaker in their weak
muscles, then it perpetuates this.
>> And they're in my clinic.
>> Yeah.
>> People are very keen on doing marathons
and half marathons at the moment and got
a couple of friends that are doing a lot
of marathons at the moment and they're
very very very skinny.
>> Oh, welcome to my world of Texas.
>> Yeah. Is that healthy? I'm not even sure
if that's that's the right question or
one can judge from just looking but
being extremely skinny in that regard
being that sort of marathon runner
physique
>> there are some that are naturally
predisposed to that
>> right so naturally predisposed having
really good running economy running
biomechanics having a leaner body and
this is what we were talking about the
Olympics earlier where we can see the
ideal body type for that particular
sport and then there are those like me
who build muscle naturally it's pretty
easy so I'd never be a skinny little
runner and my running economy is a
little bit off because of where I build
muscle versus not. So, not everyone is
meant to be a long-distance runner and
there are some that are meant to be
long-distance runners. So, if we're
talking about your friends who are like
super skinny, are they e economically
viable for being a long-distance runner?
Possibly. But we also have to look are
they male or female? What is their
injury rate? What is their fueling? And
then for me, I'd want to see the dexas
of the women that are just training long
distance and super skinny because most
of the time we see a higher visceral fat
in um in and around the organs as we're
talking about. Even though on the
outside look super lean, but they have a
really high percentage of visceral fat
because of the inflammation, the low
energy intake and most likely estradile
suppression.
>> And that's the skinny fat thing you you
talked earlier. Is is there an
evolutionary lens on this? I always
think about this when we're having these
conversations like what what used to
happen thousands of years ago.
>> If we talk about the evolutionary
biological theories and there are a lot
of sociologists that will counter what
I'm getting ready to say, so I'll
apologize in advance. We look at
original huntergatherer type
communities. The male body was designed
to go out to find the calories. The
women body was designed to stay and take
care of the offspring and make sure that
home was set. If it was low calorie,
menstrual cycle would stop because you
didn't want to reproduce in a time of
low calories. Body fat would come on
because there weren't a lot of calories.
>> And so the equival now is that I'm not
eating enough or I'm burning more than
I'm consuming.
>> Exactly.
>> So I'm in a calorie deficit in some way.
>> Exactly. In an energy deficit. So with
the male body and we see this their
brain and hypothalamus is not as
sensitive to those nutrient deficits as
much as a woman's body because we have
menstrual cycle and menstrual cycle
function. A man will lean up and get
more cognitively focused in times of low
calorie intake. So this is what we see
with fasting data and we see with
restrictive diets
>> and that was we need to bring it back to
that biological lens. low calorie, I
have to go find the calories. I have to
be fit to go find the calories. Low
calories, I need to not have to eat as
much. So, I need to store fat and I
can't have a baby because we don't have
enough calories.
>> And then stress,
>> when we add modern stress onto that,
that's a comprehensive addition of
cortisol and addition of inflammation
and that also perpetuates body fat.
>> I mean, like stress 10,000 years ago
would have been like a lion.
>> Oh, yeah. It's a lionic, right? We had
stress and that this is a natural stress
response. We have to have them to
survive. But these were episodic,
>> right,
>> stresses. Well, and your hormones would
change for a very specific purpose that
you would then go do. Your body would
free up glucose from your liver. You're
getting it ready in your bloodstream so
you can go run from the lion and then
things would shift back to normal. And
what's happening with chronic stress is
you're getting all the hormone shifts
because your body's really getting ready
for the lion except it's just that bad
meeting you had and then you're just
sitting there longer and you're not
using that glucose up. Exactly. Exactly.
>> Are women increasingly overtraining?
>> I think the problem in this country is
not
maybe in the women who are really
intentional maybe there are some that
are overex exercising but if we look at
a population
nobody is exercising enough. Exactly.
>> I mean, I would take People ask me all
the time, "Tell me the first thing
people need to do." I'm like, "I'll take
anything."
>> I mean, I'll take getting off the couch
with any method, whatever makes you
happy.
>> I'll say, get off the couch and do 10
air squats. Thank you.
>> That's enough. Yeah, that's enough.
>> Resistance train.
>> So, so in the crowd that's like, I'm
going to invest in my health every day.
>> That is not the majority of people.
>> Yeah,
>> that's my bubble. Yeah, but who the
people who listen to your show might be
a different demographic we have to
acknowledge, right, than population of
America. I mean like a lot of people who
listen to your show, Stephen, are
interested in health and their body and
achieving certain goals. And so
certainly, you know, I have practiced
fertility in North Carolina and in
Austin and I see a completely different
patient population, you know, in Austin,
Texas, which is a very fit area. PE
women are constantly overtraining. But
to Stacy's point earlier about this
maybe evolutionary what happens
women go into this hypothalamic
dysfunction even before it's what we
call like amenora. Hypothamic amenorhea
is essentially where the brain where the
hypothalamus is shuts off says can't
reproduce right now. XYZ reason no FSH
and LH are coming out. You're not
ovulating. You're not making estrogen.
You're not going to get pregnant.
>> So you're more likely to survive.
>> Yeah. It's a survival mechanism.
>> Pregnancy is dangerous as in hunter
gatherers,
>> but there's state modern medicine acts
like you're perfect or it's turned off.
And the reality is there's all these
shades of gray in between where these
different chronic stressors and your
insulin resistance and your inflammation
and you're overex exercising and you're
under fueling come in and make it so the
hypothalamus is not responding
correctly. And that's what we're trying
to get people to intervene there before
it gets too bad. And I see a large
number of women who do fall into that
zone where they are trying their hardest
to be healthy, but what they are
choosing to do is actually having a
negative impact on their hormonal health
and how their brain is interpreting
their hormones. And you it's very rare
to see that in a man. Meaning the number
one reason why I will see low
testosterone is purely because many men
are taking testosterone or because of
other exogenous factors like marijuana
use. It is very rarely my brain is not
sending out the signals to cause my
testicles to make testosterone. I like
to frame it where women are under
recovering not overtraining.
>> So if we're under recovery then it makes
it more acceptable to fuel and I always
want to bring it back to it doesn't
matter like because I come from high
performance I'm going to use those words
where it's like you're not recovering
enough. We want to focus on recovery on
these days. We want to make sure that
you're eating and fueling around. So,
it's never overtraining. It's always
under the balance is wrong. They're not.
>> So, what do you say to all the voices on
social media that are just yelling at
mostly women and telling them it's just
a matter of willpower
>> and you don't have the body composition
you deserve.
>> Well, you swipe left and don't talk to
those people.
>> But that's me, right? But I mean, I'm
talking to the woman in Ohio who's
feeling defeated and stumbles across
someone screaming at her on the internet
that her body composition that she's not
happy with
>> is her fault. I hate that because it's a
construct of society, right? Especially
western society. This is where we have
to educate. It's not your fault. These
are the things that have come into play
and lined up to create this situation.
But now we have tools to offer you to
take one step out of that situation and
let's see how many more steps we can get
you away from the situation to improve
your health.
>> Yeah.
>> And are the rules of exercise slightly
different once you've entered
permenopause?
So, this is where we really need to look
at how we can use exercise and some
environmental stress to create a really
strong adaptive stress and a really
strong recovery stress.
>> Stacey, can you explain adaptive stress?
Because I'm thinking of the 10,000
people who follow me who will be like,
>> "You have no idea what adaptive stress
is." So, if I go and I uh do some
resistance training, some heavy lifting,
I want to create a stress on my body
that's going to then have a signaling
cascade to repair the muscle in a
stronger way than when I first
>> lifting the muscle damages the muscle.
>> Yes. And it creates a series of feedback
mechanisms that make it repair stronger
than when you first went in. So, that's
an adaptive stress. And we're looking at
what levels of stress we can put. So
it's a training stress or what levels of
stress we can use through exercise to
really really create an environment that
improves our health. Okay.
>> So if we talk about sprint interval
training, the 30 seconds on and the two
to three minute recovery, the reason why
we want that super high-end stress of
our heart rate is it then creates a
eventual epigenetic change. So, it's
that environment that's going to create
a change within the muscle that's going
to allow that glute 4 protein that I
mentioned earlier to open up and have
glucose come in, reducing insulin
resistance. Also, with that really high
high heart rate, we're having a lot of
stress on the muscle that's going to
release some myioines, which are little
hormone signals that then will go to the
liver and say, "Wait a second, we don't
need to store visceral fat. we need to
create non-estrified fatty acids which
can then go into our skeletal muscle to
be used in the mitochondria as fuel. So
we want to have the stress that's strong
enough to create these cascades of
feedback mechanisms to improve our
overall health.
>> If we stay in that moderate intensity
zone, we aren't creating a strong enough
stress
>> to create that signaling.
>> What are we doing?
>> We are exacerbating
inflammation. we're exacerbating
cortisol. Now, cortisol isn't the demon,
but when we have an elevation of it, and
especially in pmenopause, when we're
sympathetically driven and we already
have a higher level of baseline
cortisol, if we are continuously in this
moderate intensity zone, we never get a
signal to allow that to drop. So if
we're looking at polarizing which is top
top end and low recovery end then with
the top end we get the signal cascade
of improving body comproving uh insulin
sensitivity as well as getting growth
hormone and testosterone responses which
then feed back to drop cortisol.
>> So am I right in thinking the solution
if I'm permenopausal is to do
highintensity interval training for
short periods of time. So, we look at
the quality of the training, not the
volume of the training. So, if we're in
our reproductive years, then yes, you
can do the moderate intensity stuff
because you have estrogen and some of
our other hormone feedback signals that
are going to drop cortisol. It's going
to allow your body to recover and
repair.
>> And when you what makes quality
training? What is quality training?
>> So, this is your polar. So, you have a
very specific session that you're going
to do.
>> So, for Vonda, it's your 30 seconds on
as hard as possible, 2 to 3 minutes
recovery. You do that four times. That's
your session.
>> Okay. I'm going to try and summarize
this.
>> See if this is a test. See if I
understood all of this stuff. So, if I
do a lot of volume, but I I play in that
sort of medium intensity range, I'm
basically just like stressing out my
body in all the worst ways.
>> Exactly.
>> Like the inflammation, it's just not
good for my body necessarily. If I don't
do vigorous enough exercise, then that's
also bad because nothing's going to
break and therefore build. it's
nothing's going to adapt, nothing's
going to grow.
>> If I do it for long periods of time,
really anything for long periods of
time, that's also stress. But the key
thing to do is to do
shorter, higher intensity
exercise that will cause my body to
adapt, but won't put it into that
inflamed stressful state.
>> And you also have to pepper in some
lower intensity work. So this is your
>> flexibility.
>> Mhm. so that you have recovery, you're
getting u blood flow circulating, you're
tapping into some mitochondrial work so
that you are still getting benefit of
exercise but it's not in that modern
intensity. So that's what we mean by
polarizing. So if we were to talk in
like the zones talk that everyone talks
is out there, right? We're looking at
>> what is zones?
>> So if we're talking about heart rate and
the way that your body works, we have
zone one, which is just sitting around,
you know, like you're Yeah,
>> we're in zone one. in zone.
>> Zone two is the bro science kind of
thing where you're like, let's let's
work in this zone two area where we're
working.
>> I was in zone two when you were talking
about menstrual cycle.
>> Okay, there you go. That's it. A little
elevated.
>> Your heart rate's elevating. Still a
little bit have a conversation. Um, for
women, it's good for recovery, stress
release. For men, it's good to improve
metabolic flexibility. When we're
looking at zone 3, four, that's the area
you want to stay out of unless you're
specifically training for something that
requires you to be there. So that would
be your half marathons, your endurance
races, that kind of stuff.
>> Everyone wants to stay out of zone
>> 3, four,
during cuz that's the medium range,
right?
>> Yeah, that's medium range.
>> So you want to jump into zone five, hang
around for
>> five, six. Yeah.
>> Okay. A couple of minutes and then get
out of there.
>> Yeah. But in a week, this is what
>> Yeah, let's be clear. So,
>> two to four days a week, you should be
lifting progressively to lift heavy,
meaning um heavier weights, fewer reps,
right? One compound lift a day, plus the
augmentive lifts that go behind it,
right? So, you're warming up first, then
you're going to do one lift, and then
you're going to do your jumping or your
balance work. The other days of the week
you will do preferably
low intensity doing anything. Walking
briskly down the New York street could
count as that. It's it's continuous
motion. And then a couple days a week
add in your sprint intervals, your
really high zone five six high
intensity.
And then when you've got that,
you can add in your 4x4 V2 max
on one of the other days because it
sounds like a lot, but when I work with
non-pro alathletes, I layer on
behaviors.
>> Absolutely.
>> Because if I say all of this at once,
>> Yeah.
>> nobody's going to do anything.
>> I always describe it as we have these
pillars, right? First, we have to nail
sleep. Doesn't matter who you are, you
have to because you cannot
>> sleep is non-negotiable.
>> Yeah. We cannot invoke any kind of
metabolic or body composition change
without adequate sleep. Also improves
stress resilience. Then we look at
nutrition and physical activity. The
behaviors that go with both of those are
somewhat independent. You have some
people that are more motivated to do
physical activity and some people who
are more motivated to change nutritional
habits. Most of the time they're two
different personalities. So we have to
look at what comes next. And then we
also have which isn't lesser importance
but often neglected is the mindfulness
and community. So this is being out in
nature. It's connecting with friends.
Might be going to a group exercise
class. It might be just having coffee
but that is really really important for
parasympathetic and whole like whole
being response. Exactly.
>> So there's a new book out um coming out
called Joycepan. I don't know if you've
spoken with her. So she's a
gerontologist and works with the very
elderly and she has a very specific,
>> you know, what determines who's going to
kill it in that last decade of life. And
>> that community part using your brain,
you know, having interactions with human
beings seems to be the key. And if you
don't keep that going through this 40s,
50s, 60s, when you get to 70 and 80,
you're not going to have a great end of
your life.
>> What about the last phase then? So
someone's post menopausal,
>> does their exercise recommendations
change at all?
>> We like to start the habits early and
continue them through. If you haven't
started, it's not too late. As we're
seeing like with Lyftmore and some other
of the older age resources coming out,
it's never too late to start. We just
have to be very careful of how you start
to have support and phase you into these
different exercise mo modalities.
>> Is it the same exercises though? meaning
>> you know the three days a week the
mobility the strength
>> I am firmly postmenopausal and I am
doing all these things
>> but it's different different people
always ask me what does heavy lifting
mean
>> right it's relative
>> it's relative my heavy is not going to
be Stacy's heavy or I should say it the
other way Stacy's very heavy is not
going to be my heavy
>> in lift more they just the authors
describe the one the one rep max and so
one rep max is like safely what is the
heaviest you can do one rep, you know.
So, for a bicep curl, what is the
heaviest weight I can do one to fail?
You know, I'm going to fail after this
one. And for me, that was about 20
pounds
>> with good form.
>> Exactly. Safely with good form. And so,
I could nail 20. And so, then they took
them down to about 70 80% of that. Um,
which for me was about 15 16 pounds. So,
that you can usually do about five reps
before you hit failure. And that is what
they consider lifting heavy. That seemed
to really resonate with my followers to
understand what that meant.
>> And there's so many women that
underestimate their strength.
>> See them and they gravitate towards the
10 lb dumbbells. It's like, put that
away. Go to the next one. Do a couple of
lifts with that. And then ideally, I
want you to put that away and pick up
the next one cuz that's going to
challenge you. Because women have been
so conditioned to do 10 to 15 reps to
get quote toned and not really put in
the work they need to to build muscle
and to get the benefit out of strength
training. And I always telling women,
you're underestimating yourself in so
many facets. Don't cheat yourself with
the strength training as well because
people have to remember what we're what
we're training for now. It's different
than I had a woman recently say, "I was
taught to do biceps curls five pounds 30
times." Well, after 30 times, not only
are you bored, but you'll probably be at
failure 30 times.
>> That will build endurance. I am training
to be as strong as possible. And when
I'm a when I have strength down, then I
start playing with tempo so that I could
build replace some of the explosive
muscle fibers that I'm going to lose
over time. to your point wonder I um
just been writing my book in Cape Town
as I was I told you before we started
recording and one of the studies that I
read about while I was writing the book
was a study done by some a guy called
Hal Hersshfield and his colleagues where
they asked they put people in these MRI
scanners and they asked them to think
about a famous celebrity and then they
asked them to think about themselves
today and then they asked them to think
about themselves in 10 years time and in
10 years time the same brain regions lit
up as if they were thinking about the
celebrity
>> which kind kind of led them to conclude
that in our brain we almost see our
future selves as a bit of a stranger.
>> Yes, that's right.
>> And so when we think about long-term
planning, this is in part why a lot of
this advice is often most effective when
it's put in the context of like
short-term performance or cognitive
benefits because we really do struggle
to like care about ourselves at 90.
>> Yeah.
>> And we I think we all kind of think we
can just I figure it out later. I think
what's different for women, especially
in menopause, is because we're also
taking care of our parents in so many
ways. You know, we're in this like
raising kids, going through our own
hormonal upheaval, and then watching our
mothers, our grandmothers, our aunts
age. And we, the way society is set up,
women become the caretakers of their
parents, generally the oldest daughter.
And I have to give full credit to my
sister who lives in the same town as my
mom and is a nurse. So, she really is
bearing the brunt of taking care of mama
because I'm living this life. So, thank
you Leah if you're watching. It is such
a tremendous stress, you know, and so
our motivation, my sister and I, is like
>> we don't want to do this to our
daughters.
>> Exactly. The other thing I want to bring
in is the brain health component, right?
We talk about Alzheimer's and dementia
and one of the reasons I really preface
doing highintensity work is the lactate
production because we're finding more
and more research coming out um showing
that part of the development of dementia
and Alzheimer and the plaque is a
misstep in brain metabolism. So when
we're looking at brain metabolism and
the brain uses a lot of glucose, it also
uses lactate. Now for women, we have
less of the glycolytic or lactate
producing fibers and we tend to lose
those with age. Men are born with more
tend to hold on to them more. So it's
not necessarily as big an issue for
lactate production. Men need to spend
more time in the low intensity being
able to produce more of our fat burning
capacity. But for women, doing that
highintensity work and being able to
produce lactate to then allow the heart
and the brain to use that preferential
fuel feeds forward to reducing the
misstep in this
brain metabolism component that occurs
and it's such a sex difference. We're
seeing a a change in glucose metabolism
in and around perry menopause into
menopause. M
>> so it's that lactate production that I
is kind of the offshoot of the
highintensity work that's super
important for brain health as well as
>> when you look at glucose metabolism in
the brain I'm talking specifically
coming out of Arizona and and from Lisa
Muscone's work and they looked at
glucose utilization in the brain
especially the forebrain through the
transition it's wildly different based
on what phase of pmenopause menopause
and postmenopause
that they're in. And it's it's
absolutely astounding. And they're
seeing patterns that can give clues that
may be the women who are headed towards
the dementia route versus those who
aren't.
>> And women are significantly more likely
than men to develop dementia and
Alzheimer's largely because they have
certain unique biological risk factors
and also because they live longer. Um
>> and the socioultural component. I keep
bringing it up because I work stress.
Yeah. But also, if we're looking at
women who are 80, 90 years old now,
their upbringing to this point is
completely different than ours. Meaning
that the job availability and the brain
stimulation they had when they were in
their 40s, 30s, 40s, 50s, completely
different than what we have now.
>> Better or worse,
>> worse. So, they didn't have necessarily
opportunity to be scientists, lawyers,
medical doctors. So, they didn't have as
much stimulation of brain and and
implications on that neuroplasticity.
So, we're seeing a higher
episodic
issue of dementia and Alzheimer's in
older women now because they didn't have
the same lay down effect that we have
now as 50 year olds, 40, 50 year olds.
And this and the stimulus we have for
neuroplasticity.
>> Oh, so
>> like you're laying down brain pathways
and neural fibers.
>> So, neuroplastic, think about it like
the bone, but you're creating pathways
in your brain to make you healthier by
resilient more resilient um
But but they're also going to have more
stronger brain younger
>> are they not going to have more stress
if they're working
>> maybe more hours.
>> Fascinating study and this one shot me
out of a cannon emotionally was if you
choose to become a caretaker of a parent
with dementia you have a 60% increased
risk. Now there's a genetic component,
but when they took the genetics out of
it and they feel like it's the stress of
caregiving for that parent, you are
signing your own death warrant because
now you are increasing your risk of
death.
>> Am I cuz Yeah, cuz I'm right in thinking
that women are still both caregiver and
now in the corporate world.
>> Yes. Yep.
>> Yes, that's right.
>> So it's both.
>> Yep.
>> Stress from both ends. Lactate
production for the win. Get that
glucose. You have to have an active plan
to combat this, right? We're not going
to live in a world that is stress free.
If you're a woman in the world, you are
likely to have a caretaking role in some
fashion, even if you are chasing other
dreams when it comes to professionally.
Building good brain pathways is
wonderful as far as a way to help start
from a higher standpoint before you have
brain loss. However, we've just like
we've said on these other tangents, the
brain is that too. We need to think
about active ways we're going to combat
what is happening in today's world
naturally. And some of the factors are
modern society that put us into this
pro-in inflammatory state. But we need
to think about making lactate. What you
know what's important for us? And it
really is a plan. This whole I'm going
to figure it out when I'm 90 and the
problems in front of me is too late for
these medical problems.
>> So, and back to your point about
neuroplasticity, we're not reading as
much. We're on our phones and so not in
my house.
>> Yeah. And so as as a culture there's
there's this worry that all this time on
the phone and these dopamine hits and
but not creating stories in your head
and and reading for pleasure at night.
You know, a lot of women are on their
phones now before bed rather than
developing that neuroplasticity that we
get from storytelling.
>> I did something at 24 years old that has
had a profound impact on my life. I set
myself the challenge of posting every
single day on my social media channels.
And at the time, I was doing it to grow
my following. But it had this profound
impact on my life. And two remarkable
things happened when I did that. I
managed to learn faster because every
single day, I'm capturing what is
happening to me and trying to distill it
down into something that I can share
with the world. But more remarkably, it
led me to building a following of many
millions of people. And that's the basis
that I used to launch the diary of a
SEO. And that's why I want to tell you
about our sponsor today, Adobe Express.
They are the platform that I use to make
all the posts across my LinkedIn and
across my Instagram. It's a couple of
clicks and you don't need to be an
expert and that is why I love using it
because I'm not an expert in graphic
design. It's accessible to use for all
of us even if we don't have the
technical prowess to design great
things. So if you want to start
compounding both your reach and your
knowledge like I did at 24 years old,
then head to adobe.
Steven and get started with Adobe
Express. That's adobe.
slashsteeen.
The next question that came in from the
audience, we we asked a thousand women
to submit their questions. The next one
is, what's the best and healthiest way
for a woman to lose weight?
>> Lift weights.
>> Lift weights
>> and eat.
>> And eat. Yes, absolutely. And you could
have a very slight calorie deficit
towards the end of the evening.
>> Running
>> as a way of burning calories. The
problem is people think that they can
out exercise a bad diet and you can't.
>> Composition of your diet matters
immensely.
>> And I hate calling it lose weight. I now
call it recomposition.
>> Yeah.
>> But let me put it in context. Yeah. Go
run. You're going to burn 100 calories a
mile. Three Girl Scout cookies, three
thin mints, US favorites,
>> is 180 calories.
>> My fave.
>> So you have to run two miles to eat
three cookies. Most of us, if you're
going to eat cookies, don't eat three
Thin Mints. You eat the whole sleeve.
Right. To your point, it is impossible
to out exercise food unless you're a
high level athlete,
thousand calories.
>> Even then, no. Because we look at diet
composition.
>> And we see that um endurance athletes
who use a lot of high sugary type
carbohydrate like the gels and the
sports stuff, they've interrupted their
gut microbiome so much that they have
>> sugar alcohols.
>> Yeah. Well, it's not even that. It's the
fillet change. We're seeing a decrease
in the diversity. Even though they're
exercising and we see that exercise
increases the diversity of the gut
microbiome, is what they're eating
during the training with the heat and
hypoxic stress that is creating the
growth of the fermicis
fil that's associated with o obese
outcomes.
>> So that's it changes the gut the gut
bacteria. Yeah. if they are.
>> So, we have this mis Yeah, we have this
misconception that if you're an elite
athlete and you're burning all these
calories, then you're just eating to
fuel, right? But it's not. It's the
quality of the diet. If we want to
perform well, whatever performance
means, if you're Olympic athlete down to
recreational person who just wants to
accomplish a 5K, the composition of your
diet is immensely important.
>> What about Zmp? Everybody seems to be on
a Zen GLP1s. I prescribe it and our
clinic is all permenopause and menopause
and so we always start with let's see
how you do with lifestyle changes first.
So we give that 3 to 6 months. When they
come back, every time they come back,
we're doing another body composition
chen for probably 50% of the patients
lifestyle plus or minus HRT. They're
their body composition changes. They're
happy. They're health, you know, they're
much healthier. Everything's moving in
the right direction. So now we're left
with the people who are doing all the
things.
>> This isn't the typical story of people
that start a Zen though. They see it on
Instagram and then a week after I'll be
at their house and I'll be like, "We"
and they'll tell me, "Yeah, I'm on a
Zen." And it's really it's usually just
someone sees it online, they hear it on
a podcast, and they're on it within a
couple of days.
>> That access is getting easier, the price
is coming down. And there is for any
medication, there are risks, there are
benefits, and there's
ways that will promote health. And with
any medication, you can not promote
health if you give
>> I mean, GLP1s can be revolutionary for
certain people. A lot of people are not
training for a 5K, let alone anything
else. And we know if we go very simply,
fat cells, right, they make a different
type of estrogen. They're inflammatory.
You have insulin resistance. And all of
this sets you up at a deficit to say, "I
want to get healthier." It for women,
we'll say who have PCOS who already have
a predisposition for insulin resistance.
Gio, they have a harder time losing
weight because now they're also storing
visceral fat. We know they get on this
cycle with hormonal change. you know,
being on ozimic allows them to lose
weight and combat insulin resistance in
a faster way than they've ever been able
to do before. And especially when it
comes to fertility and you're on a
timeline, that can be really
revolutionary when you lose weight
because that estone decreases. Many
women with PCOS if they were overweight
will start ovulating again because that
suppression from the additional estrogen
is gone and their inflam inflammation
markers go down their insulin resistance
decreases. So there's a subset of people
who have found their life changed by
them and we never want to discredit
that. Many people have had difficulty
losing weight, chronic medical
conditions have been able to reverse
them and this has been a tool in the
tool box
>> because about 70% of Americans would fit
in that category of chronic health
conditions, difficulty losing weight.
>> Yeah, 73% right now are overweight or
obese.
>> So should 73% of Americans be on GLP
once
>> and was higher in women?
>> Yeah. Well, we always one common thing
is having tools in the toolbox and being
able to know when to use them, when to
offer them. Just like when we have the
HRT discussion, we don't want to see
people, we'll say women for this
discussion, not being offered a
therapeutic option because or not
choosing it out of fear.
>> Well, when I hear that it's going to
help me lose weight
>> and I've got two options. I can go out
and lift all these weights, Stacy, and I
can which you know, one I don't Yeah,
it's hard, isn't it? go to the gym, I
have to put my shoes on or all these all
these things. Or I can take this
injection
>> and lose all your muscle and lose your
bone and end up like the little floating
figure in Wall-E movie that I've talked
about before, right? And that's that's
my fear of just blanket people using
>> you're also whether you mean to or not
giving the illusion that, you know,
willpower is all you need to lose weight
by what you said, right? I can either do
these hard things or I can choose this
medication which appears to be the
easier way out. And two things can be
true at once. People can work extremely
hard. Maybe they don't understand
exactly what they should be doing and
that's part of what we're trying to
change the discussion on. But reversing
some metabolic change even initially can
make a big difference in their game
plan. But you will lose body weight on
these medications. And so you have to
have somebody you know guiding the ship.
I think what we all don't love is the
access without oversight. Meaning,
nobody's helping you say, "How are you
not losing muscle? How are you doing
this in a safe fashion?" You can just
text somebody on an app and suddenly
have the medication shipped to your
house. You know, in our clinic, it is an
hourong. Now, they're coming in to
discuss the GLP1 option. It is an
hourong visit
>> of risks, benefits, side effects,
protein intake, resistance training,
mandatory. We will follow your bone
density. We will follow your bone mass.
I mean, your muscle mass. You know, we
have these scanners.
>> These are great
>> available. And we're not going to get to
a number on the scale and sacrifice your
long-term health. And my patients are
drinking the Kool-Aid. They're coming
in. They they've found, you know,
>> they're coming to you for a reason.
>> Yeah. And so, I'm a little bit unique in
my clinic in that I have a social media
following and people kind of watch a few
things before they come see me. So, they
know my they're not shocked by me giving
this advice because I give it all day on
social media. So if you give them the
ismpeek but they still don't go to the
gym, they still don't do anything else,
>> then we'll stop giving it to you.
>> They won't be healthy and they know
that. We've talked to them about that.
We've explained it on the front end that
this is a tool in your toolkit because
we can see their muscle mass. We won't
renew the prescription if they've lost
the muscle. So if you are losing weight
and not lifting and eating enough
protein on ompic or any way else and you
do a body composition, you may see total
weight lost. You will see pounds of
muscle loss, you may see body fat
percentage loss. But if you do this
correctly with enough protein in your
diet and lifting weights, the amount of
muscle loss will be very small versus
amount of fat loss.
>> So you we know we are going to lose a
little muscle, but you can't lose 8
pounds of muscle.
>> Right.
>> Right. So we can tell and I give them
the hard numbers like 10% is acceptable.
We're going over that. We're getting
into the danger zone. We're going to cut
back on your dose. we're going to, you
know, but they commit to the the work on
the front end.
>> I think that's the important point is
that these GLP1 antagonists don't burn
your fat. They burn they stop you eating
as much.
>> They stop there,
>> which is going to mess up which is going
to reduce everything. Cuz I was thinking
about myself. I was thinking, well, I I
go to the gym every day. I'm going to
keep going. So maybe if I had a a little
bit of a Zanek or whatever it's called,
>> then my it would burn my fat. But
actually, that's not it's just gonna
stop me eating, which is gonna reduce my
muscle, my burden.
>> Right. Goodbye biceps.
>> Yeah, that's the that's the thing. It's
like
>> I'll lose my subscribers and
>> Exactly. Exactly.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay, that makes sense. So to this
person asking what's the best and
healthiest way to lose weight? The
response is stop eating the cookies and
start lifting some weights. Oh,
>> the 8020 rule, right? So 80% of the time
you're on it, right? You're paying
attention to a high quality diet. You
are eating according circadian rhythm.
You are doing the strength training.
You're getting the good sleep. And then
20% is life where I'm going to stay up
late. I'm going to have some wine or
whiskey. I'm going to go out. I'm going
to be on vacation. So, you're not
excluding all the fun things in life. If
it comes to a point where you're like,
I'm still not budging the needle, then
maybe it's a 9010 rule where 90% of the
time you're on it and 10% is the life
factor. There's these hard and fast
rules I've been accused of giving. I
don't give rules. I give optimization
ideas. So, it's not following strict
8020 or 9010. It's what fits in your
life. And if you're really motivated on
losing weight, the first thing I tell
people to do is ditch alcohol.
>> Mhm. Everyone wants to lose the the part
on the belly.
>> Sure.
>> Is there not like an exercise I can do
just to burn the part on the belly?
>> Exercise burn.
>> So visceral fat's a little bit
different. It's like a whole different
organ. So you know when we talk about
visceral fat, it has different drivers.
You know, we drive fat to the
intraabdominal cavity. It has it creates
different cytoines. Subcutaneous fat is
a storage facility. It is when we
overeat calories, we will drive fat
under the skin. And it's kind of
genetically determined. Females tend to
gain about their hips and thighs. Okay.
And actually that hip and thigh fat is
protective for cardiovascular disease in
a premenopausal women. Not in men but in
women.
>> And so it is so but when that fat shifts
to the intraabdominal cavity, it starts
that fat is metabolically active than
the fat under our skin and it creates
these pro-inflammatory cytoines. And
then you end up in this negative
feedback cycle of, you know, your liver
starts becoming dysfunctional, insulin
resistance increases, that drives more
fat to the visceral cavity, increases
inflammation, and it just goes on and on
and on.
>> So get liposuction.
>> No, no, no. You can't lipo the viscra
inside. That fat that's really inside
the abdominal cavity is what we're
talking about. That visceral fat, which
is the worst kind.
>> What about liposuction? Can't I just
suck it out? People are doing all kinds
with their
>> under the skin. Under the skin, you can.
That's an aesthetic decision. What was
the stuff under the skin?
>> Oh,
>> lipo suction it out. Is that a good idea
or a bad idea?
>> No, it'll come back.
>> All these things we're talking about, it
sounds like a lot of instructions, and
it is actually, but when you layer them
on, it becomes your lifestyle. It's not
a diet. It's not an exercise program.
It's just how I live.
>> Which brings me to my next question from
the audience, which is, what is the best
diet for a woman who is permenopausal?
plant forward,
>> plant heavy.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Because you're getting you're
getting So, when I'm talking to
patients,
>> we talk about the quality of their
nutrition. So, is your is your pattern
of eating I hate to call it diet because
it's four-letter word now, but is the
pattern that you're eating pro
pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory?
>> What's pro-inflammatory?
>> So, meaning the things that you put in
your body, are they likely to cause
inflammation? And we know there are
certain things that do that like heavily
ultrarocessed foods, you know, in large
amounts. Everybody can tolerate a little
bit of everything. But if the majority
of your diet, and for most Americans,
the majority of their diet is 60% is
ultrarocessed foods. Okay. Those are by
and large plurinflammatory.
>> What about red meat?
>> Red meat in moderation and especially
leaner ones seems to be a a very
reliable source of protein. As far as
inflammation goes, it seems to be
neutral in small amounts, not heavily
like highfat meats or processed meats.
Then you're flipping over into
pro-inflammatory.
>> Is there a diet for fertility?
>> It's very much what we're saying right
here that plants have fiber that's going
to feed your gut microbiome that's going
to decrease inflammation. So fruits and
vegetables, getting enough fiber is the
number one change that most people need
to make. From there, we want to of
course decrease all your ultrarocessed
foods, healthy fats. Fat is the backbone
of chole like cholesterol is the
backbone of your steroid hormones. So if
you want to make hormones, we've got to
have some cholesterol, some healthy fats
coming in to provide the backbone for
that. That's essential. So things like
olive oil, nuts, your avocados, seeds,
these are going to provide some of those
healthier fats that are easier to use
for you. And when it comes to protein,
there's a lot of different protein
sources. We know that the the data is so
hard on nutrition because I can quote a
study that says for every serving of
plant protein that you take over animal
protein, you have a higher chance of
ovulating regularly. And that's true. A
lot of that though is nuanced by the
fact that people who eat plant-based
sources of proteins tend to eat other
plants in general and less ultrarocessed
foods than people have the highest
cortile of meat intake. If we go to a
micro level though, not all meat, animal
meat is created equal. Animal meat does
not have fiber in it. So we know it's
not feeding our gut microbiome. So if we
want to talk about carnivore diet,
things like that is definitely not
microbiome friendly for you and not
hormonally healthy. So we really want to
really have those whole foods, the
fruits, vegetables, the healthy fats,
the proteins that are going to be good
sources. And just like we talked about
other things, it's not all or nothing.
Red meat every day is probably going to
be inflammatory. Having it on the
weekend is probably okay. And the way I
describe this to patients is let's
imagine a scale where every decision you
make can kind of tick up the
inflammatory marker or bring it back
down. If you are making active decisions
that are more anti-inflammatory,
you can tolerate the glass of champagne,
the birthday cake, these little things
that we know will cause inflammation in
your body, but your body is meant to
respond to inflammation and get back to
normal. The problem is when it's
constantly challenged, when 70% of the
things that you eat cause this chronic
inflammation inside of you, your body
can no longer respond appropriately when
it's challenged again.
>> Things that are pro-inflammatory tend to
also disrupt the gut microbiome. Tend to
like it all makes sense when you think
about it.
>> And there's quite a few studies that are
coming out in the four to five years
before the one point in time called
menopause.
So in late pmenopause that there's a
significant decrease in gut microbiome
digest.
>> Oh, Zoe did that work?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's really interesting because of
the second pass and the way that
hormones are metabolized. When we have
uh our natural cycle and we have a an
exposure of our sex hormones, yeah, the
common cycle, then we have more of
diversity because the gut bugs help
unwind. I guess is that
>> so we metabolize estrogen into inactive
metabolites and then they get excreted
in the feces. So it goes through the
liver and then dumped into the bile. And
>> does that mean that if I if my
microbiome is likely to be less diverse
as I age, I need to be thinking more
about
>> the divers diversity of your plant
foods. And this is why it's really
>> probiotics, probiotics, etc.
>> Not over the counter. Okay,
>> you first start with food, but not a
pill that you're trying to take, but
actually the food that you're putting
into your body is the the best
fiber.
>> What about protein blunder?
>> The way I like to approach nutrition for
people is first having people notice
what they're eating and then from that
break it down into well, how much of it
is protein, how much it is fat, how much
is carbs. Without that kind of
education, it's almost meaningless. So
when we've done that and uh I'm making
recommen recommendations for protein,
we will not build the muscle we need to
build. We will not get stronger the way
we're capable of getting stronger. A if
we're not eating enough and B if we're
not taking enough protein. So the RDA
recommendations of8 gram per kilogram is
survival doses of protein like sitting
on a chair like a mushroom
>> preventing malnutrition is the goal of
itable.
It is not for active people. It is not
for living your best life people
>> eight
>> the recommended daily intake
>> is8 gram per kilogram of lean body mass.
>> So it's low
>> it's very low. So the research uh
supports easily supports
let's use pounds.86
grams per pound for lifting people. I
recommend over a gram. A gram for ideal
pound because
I'm presuming
that the people I'm taking care of are
going to start being active, that we're
trying to build muscle, that we're not
in starvation mode.
So 0.8
grams per pound.
I recommend one
um gram per ideal pound. So there's some
other research that's come out looking
at skinny fat. So that's normal weight
obesity. So not as we're talking
>> normal BMI,
>> normal BMI, but internal high body fat.
>> And then at the And what happens is they
have low muscle mass.
>> Low muscle mass. So they took
>> a group of of women, split them up. So
you had a control group and then you had
this intervention group. And the only
change they made, there's no exercise,
and the only change they made was they
brought the intervention group up to 1.6
grams of protein per kilogram. So
>> this is8 per pound
>> and over the course of 12 weeks of
eating that protein intake, this
intervention group completely recmped
their body. So their muscle quality came
up, body fat went down. Control group,
of course, nothing happened. So it just
shows the importance of having that
higher protein intake just to support
basic muscle function and the frailty
data out of the WHI. So the women's
health initiative looked at multiple
things not just breast cancer and heart
disease but you know they followed these
women even off of HRT for decades.
>> Y
>> and when they looked at frailty scores
in the elderly and protein intake above
1.6 six grams per kilogram
>> had the lowest frailty scores just based
on protein intake alone.
>> Yep.
>> What about fasting? I know so many
people that are doing water fasts and
juice fasts and it's impact.
>> Have they told you why?
>> I've had an evolution with the way I
think about fasting. um when I first
kind of you know was stepping out of the
box and what's happening in menopause
and why was my body composition I didn't
know what to call it back then but what
was all this going on that was new and
all my patients were having it as well
and these were my my girlfriends I
worked in a small town with a big
university and these were PhDs and we're
running marathons we're doing all this
stuff and everyone's kind of complaining
of the same thing and so fasting seemed
to be helpful and my girlfriends were
trying we all kind of did this fasting
thing and I was like super excited about
it everybody felt better blah blah blah
blah blah okay So, fast forward, I'm
learning more about hormones, body
composition, protein intake, all of
these needs. And suddenly, as I'm
counseling my patients, I'm realizing I
can't meet my own protein goals if I'm
trying to fast at the same time. And I
quickly realized if we're looking at
health span, if we're looking at body
composition, there may not be a lot of
room for fasting for these patients, you
know, or for my girlfriends, you know,
and it is really difficult for my
patients to reach their nutrition goals.
So, never at the expense of meeting your
basic nutrition goals and your calorie
needs. And it is really, really hard to
do while fasting. So, you may get a
short-term benefit with weight loss,
>> but there really doesn't. Now Dr. Sims
can get into the nitty-gritty of you
know
>> but the basic idea of fasting if we want
to use the term fasting we have to look
at it is are we talking about
intermittent fasting or timerestricted
eating. So intermittent fasting is kind
of like you know your water fast your
5day 2day all that kind of crazy stuff
which for the most part men can get away
with and have a positive impact on body
composition but women can't. If we want
to talk about timerestricted eating and
working with our circadian rhythm, which
is optimal, then you have breakfast
within or food within a half an hour of
waking up that helps dampen that um
geroline and cortisol response I talked
about before so that everything is
coming down. Your hormones are starting
to work properly and your body's like
great, I'm ready to go. I can I can
handle this. And then you're eating at
regular intervals. And I try to have
people have protein and fiber at every
eating interval so that they are
maximizing protein and fiber intake.
Then you have dinner and then you don't
eat after dinner.
>> Every eating interval.
>> So breakfast, maybe you have a snack. If
we're looking at training or exercise,
if you're splitting your breakfast, then
you're having some protein and carb
before having the rest of your protein
or more protein afterwards. And then
you're having uh uh some protein and
some fiber at lunch. So you're having
maybe tempeh or tofu or salmon with
salad or fruit and veg. So every time
you're eating, you have a a protein and
fiber focus.
>> So timerestricted eating is within a
24-hour period.
>> So you're looking at I'm going to eat
during the day when my body needs it.
Yeah.
>> And I'm going to stop eating when I
finish dinner. So I have about a two
maybe three-hour break before I go to
bed. So that when I go to bed, I'm not
trying to digest food. my body can get
into the parasympathetic responses it
needs to to sleep well for reparation
>> and then I eat again at what time
>> when you wake up in the morning
>> it's typically about 12 hours of eating
and 12 hours of not so you're trying to
follow that circadian rhythm and work
with your hormones it can also when you
do have that period of time which maybe
that sounds very intuitive but a lot of
people are eating at 1000 p.m. they're
snacking on food, then they're trying to
go to bed, and then they're getting up.
When you give your body a little bit
longer, so at 12 hours time is when your
body will really efficiently be using up
all your glucose, really dropping some
of those insulin levels, but it's not so
much that it's stressful. And we're
using stress very generically here, but
on a cellular level, long periods of
fasting for women specifically can be
very stressful to the body. And that's
why if you think about Stacy's example
of what happened in two fasting periods
to, you know, a man and a woman,
different things are going to happen to
your body if it thinks it's being in
starvation. So, we don't want to put
your body in a starve state. We're just
trying to give it a time period without
food so that it can start to process the
energy that's available differently.
>> Why? Why not, though? What's going to
happen? And I understand from what we
talked about earlier that my fertility
my my cycle is going to change.
>> But is that
>> well there's there's adaptive stress and
then there's stress to the point of
you're you're hurting yourself.
>> Men can you said that men can do longer
fasts.
>> They can they can do longer fasts and it
can show to actually you know be
something that might be advantageous for
them for how their body is made. Might
increase their focus and some other
metrics. But for women, these longer
periods are actually going to promote
more visceral fat storage and become
pro-inflammatory.
And you said it a little casually, but
disrupting your hypothalamus and
shutting off your hormone system will
cause a low estrogen state. And that's
very problematic as we've talked about.
So thinking about your body should not
be in a starved state. So utilizing
timerestricted eating meaning I'm going
to eat within my circadian rhythm the
hours that there is sun outside back
what how your body is made to function
is working with your biology. If you're
saying I'm going to not eat for 3 days
because I'm doing this fasting period
for women that's going to induce a
stressful state where you're going to
start to store more as visceral fat and
cause more inflammation. And if we bring
it into the, you know, people holding a
fast till noon or after you're phase
shifting. So it's like you're having
social jet lag where if you're phase
shifting your hormone responses, your
appetite hormones, then you're not going
to get into a good sleep because your
body is like it's not time to go to
sleep. Your melatonin peak in women
usually peaks around 9:00. So you start
to get sleepy. That gets shifted to 11,
12. So you're not actually going to get
good sleep because you now have reset
your melatonin responses. So we want
women to understand that timerestricted
eating when you're not eating when in
the dark is really beneficial.
>> Easiest way to say it.
>> Easiest way to say it. Yeah. You're
fueling for your body during the day
because that's when it needs the fuel.
That's when we want to be able to create
uh an environment that's supportive to
hormone health, supportive to muscle
growth, to brain health, to all the
things and reducing stress when we can
control that stress. So when you start
phase shifting and holding fast and
creating this stress on a circadian
level knowing that there's a circadian
response on every cell as well as a
total body circadian rhythm that if you
shift that then we start seeing a lot of
metabolic dysfunction poor sleep and
unfortunately we see this in shift
workers because that's what's happening.
They're having circadian shift
>> and they have significantly lower
longevity. They live what? I I think I
heard 14 years less if you're working
night shifts.
>> I don't know.
>> You have higher rates of infertility,
higher rates of pregnancy loss. You
you're more metabolically unhealthy. Of
course, we're generalizing a group of
people. And sometime I think we've all
had moments of time of life where shift
work was part of what we had to do. But
night shift work, most people are not
getting enough sleep during the day and
they're what we call flipping back and
forth, right? because you want to be on
a daytime schedule on your off days and
live your life that you're constantly
sacrificing what your body needs. And
what I tell people is you may if you can
get off of that, it it will be a
healthier life pattern. But in moments
where it's not, you need to really
prioritize trying to get enough sleep,
making sure that you're taking care of
yourself in the other time periods
because you're set up for a place that
is going to cause hormone dysfunction
and impact your metabolic health.
>> Mhm.
>> You believe the same. I believe
>> I uh advocate uh feeding ourselves for
optimum health. To be any kind of
active, you must feed yourself. and um
stop eating three time 3 hours before
bed.
>> So, what do you think of people that do
these longer fasts? Do you think that
they've just been given poor advice?
Because I know I was talking about Mel
and I know she does frequently does
three-day fasts
>> because I think people think they've
heard this term autophagy.
>> Autophagy is the term.
>> Take it Stacy.
>> So, this is the thing with autophagy.
>> You get that with exercise. So the idea
of autophagy is recycling the some of
the parts of cells that have broken down
or somehow become dysfunctional. So your
body's really good at cleaning that out.
We see with exercise, it invokes that
autophagy. With fasting, it invokes that
too, but not the severe fasting like
three-day fast, that kind of stuff. When
we're looking at the telomeir changes
that people say with fasting, you get
that with exercise. So telomeir is um
points that we look on the DNA to see
how you're aging. So we want longer
telomeir length because that means you
are more stress resilient. You get that
with exercise cuz exercise is a big
stress. It creates a a change within
like we were talking about before. Yeah.
Adaptive stress, epigenetic changes
which improves all of those markers that
people are so adamant fasting does.
>> What about fasting and then doing
exercise? So fasted exercise is that
>> for women? No. That's what she taught
me.
>> For men, it I'm going to say no as well
because when we're looking at the
fueling mechanics of exercise, muscle is
a very metabolically active tissue.
>> If your body is trying to fuel itself,
it's going to break down the very first
thing that's creating a energetic need,
which is muscle. We see in women, women,
>> you're going to lose muscle.
>> You're going to break it down and use
the amino acids as fuel. You can tap
into blood glucose and some fat, but
when you aren't bringing blood glucose
up through eating first, it's really
hard for your body to understand that
this is what you want it to do. So, it's
like, okay, I need to conserve fat. I'm
I don't want to go through all the
glucose that I have because I need it
for brain health. So, I'm going to start
feeding more amino acids in to fuel what
I'm doing.
>> For women, we already use more amino
acid than men. So, if we're looking at
fasted training, then we're already
increasing the amount of lean mass that
our body is going to break down to use
as fuel.
>> I'm pretty sure it was you that told me
there's this part of the brain that's
kind of checking if there's energy in
our blood, if there's glucose in our
blood.
>> That's part of our hypothalamus.
>> And so, the hypothalamus is this sensor
that's kind of checking. And in a woman,
again, correct me when I butcher this,
but if it understands that there's no
glucose in the blood, then it's going to
go into that survival state, which is
going to start to shut things down,
>> which means growth of muscle isn't going
to be possible.
>> Um, because once upon a time, I guess
that stress without the fuel would have
been a threat, especially in the context
of like my menstrual cycle and my
reproductive health.
>> That's a good way of of wrapping it up.
Yeah. It's not that we don't have blood
glucose, it's low blood glucose and no
nutrients coming in that the
hypothalamus is sensing. So, we're
looking at neuropeptide responses within
the brain within the hypothalamus that
controls appetite hormone uh the way
that your body's using fuel. So, if we
don't have stuff coming in, the
hypothalamus is like, "Oh, wait a
second. What's going on here?" Is it
fair to say the woman's body is more I
was going to say stubborn but that's a
slightly negative word less flexible
>> than than a man's
>> more complex complex it's complex and
more stress defend itself
>> it's very much stress resilient so it's
very defendable
>> it's trying to protect you it really is
looking at how what is it going to do to
keep your functions happening balance in
balance but because women can get
pregnant and pregnancy is not a health
neutral state it's a huge strain on the
body
>> that is an extra layer of one of the
things that sometimes decides I'm going
to put this to your side because I'm
going to
>> to protect
>> keep you functioning. I want to work on
all of our other body functions. We're
going to shut off that side that's not
sending out FSH and LH and making
reproductive hormones cuz we can't
afford to keep you healthy. Then we
definitely can't afford to grow a baby
and keep you healthy. If you are
pregnant and go through times of severe
stress, illness, injury,
your body will eject
what is in the womb through a
miscarriage or, you know, early
pregnancy loss or mis or preterm labor
because it is always going to try to
protect you first.
>> So, you're at high risk of a failed
pregnancy.
I wonder if I could frame Mel's your
question about Mel and the way I I frame
all the advice whether it's research
advice or internet advice is you have to
know what your goal is. What is Mel's
goal or your goal or because listen
they're exclusive longevity if longevity
is your goal like live longer at any
cost well then there's a lot of research
about severe calorie restriction and
lifestyle and just lots of severe ways
to live.
Okay, if that's longevity is your goal
that's your goal. If your goal is peak
performance like a pro alete,
that is a different kind of life and
training and reps and peak performance
at the pro level doesn't necessarily get
you longevity. Proathletes live less, at
least contact athletes live less than
people focus on longevity. But the third
bucket that most of us live in is health
span and wellness. It's neither high
performance live less time. And it's
neither austerity live the longest
possible. It is the middle ground. It's
the homeostasis balance. And so when
questions like that come up, the first
question in my mind is which bucket are
you in? Are you in a peak performance?
You're going to do different kind of
training, different kind of eating. We
know you may have a decreased lifespan
because of the stress you put on versus
this. So, what are we working for?
>> I think a lot of the people that talk
about these fasts often say to me,
especially when they're referring to
juice fasts that it's kind of like
cleaning out the system.
>> They say it's like it's like cleaning
house.
>> You don't need to clean out your That's
not how you clean out your system.
>> Taking the fiber out of those fruits and
vegetables,
>> taking away all the things that you
need.
>> Juice is 500 calories of pure glucose.
>> Yeah.
>> What if it's vegetable juicing?
Why not just eat the vegetables and get
the fiber for your gut?
>> But you have a liver. Your liver.
>> I think it's marketing. I think they're
falling prey to marketing. And that's a
big wellness trend.
>> I know. But it's it's massive. Honestly,
you would. Yeah. I know so many people,
so many of my best friends
>> going on detox wellness retreats.
>> Well, even when I ask them why they're
doing a water fast, they say, "I'm just
detoxing." Or when I ask them why
they're grinding up this fruit and
vegetable and, as you say, pulling out
all the fiber from it. It feels more
attainable to say, I'm doing this crazy
thing for 3 days, then I'm going to make
a life switch to just live a more
preventive anti-inflammatory lifestyle.
>> Before the Diario was what it is today,
it was just an idea. And it started with
me, a cheap plug-in microphone, and my
Mac right here. And I have to say when I
first had the idea for the diary of a
CEO, my thinking was that the world
might want to see into the diaries of
some of the most interesting, successful
people really in high places that were
doing interesting things. So after
recording that first episode under my
duvet, I sat on my Mac by our sponsor
Apple and spent hours editing on Garage
Band and eventually uploaded it and
honestly I thought that would probably
be it. But a couple of my friends said
they enjoyed it, so I kept on recording.
And over time, the microphone has
changed and we now have this incredible
setup here. But the thing that has
stayed the same is I'm still using the
Mac. Even today, my entire team across
our studio still uses the Mac. Our first
few episodes maybe had tens of people
listening, but now tens of millions of
people tune in all over the world, which
is still absolutely crazy to me. So, if
there is an idea that keeps tapping you
on the shoulder, this is your sign to
start. Your great ideas start on Mac and
you can find out more at apple.com/mack.
Have you ever heard about this before?
This thing I'm holding in my hands now.
This is called Ketone IQ. The website is
ketone.com. You've heard me on this
podcast talking about the fact that I
stay much of the year in a ketogenic
state, which is a highly restricted
diet. And the reason I do that is
plenty. One of them is I spend hours and
hours talking to people for a living. So
I want to make sure my brain is firing
in an optimal way. And the other reason
that I do the ketogenic diet is because
I just feel better. So when I discovered
this, which is what they call an
exogenous ketone product where you can
drink it and it increases your blood's
ketone levels, I was blown away. I
contacted them, I met them, I invested
extremely heavily into their company and
I've become a co-owner of the company
accordingly and they sponsor this show
now. So if you want to try this out for
yourself, I recommend you try it. Just
visit ketone.com/stephven
and you'll get 30% off your first
subscription order. You'll also get a
free gift with your second shipment.
That's ketone.com/stephven.
And in terms of supplements generally,
do you know, again, not to bring Melon
to this for the thousandth time today,
but a couple of um couple of Christmases
ago, I told her that she should be
having creatine because I all these
people on my podcast told me it and she
said, "No, it's for bodybuilders." Yeah,
that's the old school thought. When
we're thinking about creatine and how it
got its chops in the supplement world,
we're looking at muscle performance and
taking five grams four times a day with
some carbohydrate to enhance muscle
performance is how it started. But when
you start really disseminating down into
the health aspects of creatine, creatine
is used in every fast energetic of the
body. So that means your brain, your
heart, your gut, muscle, everything that
requires energy from 0 to 30 seconds,
creatine is involved. Women have about
70 80% of the stores of men. And when we
start looking at all the different types
of diets that are out there, lots of
exclusionary food diets, then the intake
of creatine is lower. What we're finding
in the research from health perspective
is that it does so many positive things
when you're able to saturate the tissues
to bring it up with even a small dose of
3 to five grams a day. Our liver makes
about three, but we don't necessarily
eat enough to help supplement all of the
tissues.
>> How much would it take? Like 12 chicken
breasts or something?
>> 22.
>> Okay.
>> 22 chicken breast. A lot. So when we
look at the supplementation and being
able to saturate all of our tissues
thoroughly to support those fast
energetics, we see things like better
cognition focus. We see a faster
recovery from small brain traumatic like
a friend's daughter hit her head on the
um the laundry door of the dryer and got
a TBI or a small concussion from that,
started using creatine, came out of it a
lot faster. I mean, there are things
that help with brain metatasm. We see
women who have incidences with IBS or
gut issues and they're using creatine.
It helps decrease the symptomology.
We're seeing now studies coming out
about fatigue. And this is where the 38
g per kilogram of body weight or the
equivalent of 20 gram if you're 60 kilos
helps with fatigue and focus. Especially
if you're under a lot of high stress.
Because if you're under a lot of high
stress, your body's going through a lot
of blood glucose trying to keep up with
that stress. So creatine isn't just the
bodybuilding set. There's so many
different health benefits and it keeps
coming out with more and more research
to show how beneficial creatine is.
>> Could you give me the menopause
supplements, if there is such a
>> Okay, so in general, um, we're not going
to cure menopause with supplements. Let
me just take straight up. Okay. Most
women are going to be deficient in fiber
and most women are going to be deficient
in vitamin D. And vitamin D is hugely
important in multiple enzyatic processes
in our body. And it's really hard to get
enough through our nutrition, even
eating stacks of salmon a day, which is
really high in vitamin D. So about 80%
of my patients are not only just low in
vitamin D, they're deficient. So, that
is one that we can supplement safely up
to about 4,000 IUs international units
is how vitamin D is measured a day
without worries of becoming toxic or
having too much vitamin D, which is
possible. And so, usually I'm having
creatine. Absolutely. It's like a go-to.
And we're looking at her nutritional
profile. We're looking at her fiber
intake. And then we're adding in a fiber
supplement if she needs it.
>> Natalie, in terms of fertility, what is
the fertility supplement stack,
>> Percy? And first and foremost, we're
going to say that if you are trying to
get pregnant, which by asking fertility,
we're going to presume, we want to make
sure you have folic acid on board. So
folic acid is the essential component,
one very important part in cell
division, but it's essential for a baby
when it comes to brain development and
spinal cord development. We call these
neural tube defects. And the reason why
I'm bringing it up is that there's a lot
of chatter about folic acid out there,
but it is the only supplement folic acid
in its folic acid form that is proven to
prevent these neural tube defects such
as your baby being born without a brain.
And interestingly, in today's world, a
lot of foods are also fortified with
folic acid. But these are some foods
that are often processed and people are
consuming less. So we are having less
consumption of folic acid in our diet.
Therefore making it even more important
that we are supplementing with folic
acid. As Dr. Haver said, vitamin D,
vitamin D is essential for your entire
body. But when it comes to hormone
metabolism and fertility as well, we
even see women who are going through IVF
with donor eggs and we know they're very
good quality, have lower success rates
if they have lower vitamin D levels.
This is something that almost everybody
is deficient in. We do test and then
target treatment to try to get you to an
optimal level. But also omega-3 fatty
acids are really important in your
entire body, but especially in your
reproductive years if you might get
pregnant. And I often recommend
magnesium for most patients as well. And
then from a fertility standpoint, if you
have infertility, there are studies that
show that co-enzyme Q10 can be highly
beneficial when it comes to egg quality.
This is important in our mitochondrial
health. And for the sake of the one
question you asked, remember when we
talked about eggs, we've got our genetic
health, which is largely dependent on
age. We have our metabolic health. The
mitochondria from the egg controls all
development for the embryo. And in fact,
the cellular functions for an embryo,
the first three days of life, solely
come from the egg. The male genome
doesn't even kick in until day three of
embryo life. So the function of the egg
to be able to divide and do normal cell
functions is very important. And
sometimes we see that reduced in
infertility patients and co-enzyme Q10
is an easy thing we can get over the
counter. Doesn't appear to have any
harmful side effects and has potential
benefits in some subsets. So my
infertility patients I add that on.
>> Wonder all things
>> aging, performance, strength, bone.
>> Mhm.
>> What is the supplement stack for for
longevity? vitamin D, magnesium is
critically important for a variety of uh
metabolic functions. Omega-3 for
anti-inflammation,
creatine, I'm a big fan of. If we move
looking at uh scinesscent cell load and
inflammation, we haven't really talked
about longevity, but scinsesscent cells
are those B those cells left over from
normal function that are so damaged that
they can't flip into programmed cell
death. So they circulate around and
produce noxious um chemicals that can
lead to a variety of disease. So we want
to minimize those and one way to do it
is lifestyle. Another way is to use an
herb called fiseten. So I add that on
and then also I do myself and check
levels on my people of intracellular
NAD+. NAD is a co-enzyme in 300
metabolic reactions. It's an it's an uh
an energetic pathway. Now, it's very
popular right now. And the critical
differentiator for me is that taking
whole molecule NAD such as in IVs, our
body needs to make it. So for myself and
for my people, I supplement with NMN,
which is the immediate precursor of NAD+
so that my body can then turn it into
NAD+ and it can work intracellularly. It
can also be delivered two reactions out
uh in the form of NR. These are in the B
vitamin categories. So that in two
reactions your body makes NAD+. So
the data does not show that you can IV
NAD+ for ac efficacy cuz it works
intracellularly. So you supplement its
precursor.
>> I've heard so many people talking about
NMN recently.
>> Yes, that's right. That's what I'm
talking about.
>> Is there clinical evidence to show that
it's effective? So you know those the
lab that I work with uh I happen to know
the scientist and he has hundreds of
thousands of data points checking before
NAD+ levels intracellularly
supplementing and then after and he can
elevate those levels
>> and it's associated with longevity like
intrinsically associated with longevity
a lot of the the bro science I guess
longevity
>> well it's intrinsic intrinsically
related to lots of normal metabolic
function and uh energy in the body.
Whether or not it makes you live longer,
I don't have that data.
>> Is it a tablet?
>> It is a powder the way I take it.
>> Mhm.
>> What about collagen? People talk a lot
about collagen. It's in all the protein
powders now.
>> I know, but it's not a protein as we
think about it. Like you'll see all
these collagen protein. It doesn't count
as dietary protein for muscle
development.
>> Does it work as a supplement?
>> There depends on what you're looking
for.
>> Yeah, exactly. and Mike Orsby out of um
University of Southern Florida, he has
been doing quite a bit of research on
collagen and joint pain um and found
that there is some efficacy in taking
the type 2 collagen to reduce joint
pain. It doesn't help with cartilage
regeneration. It doesn't help with
osteoarthritis, but it does dampen
inflammation and joint pain. So again,
it depends on what you want to use it
for. In the first episode, we talked a
little bit about environmental toxins
and I wanted to before we talk about
sleep and close off, I wanted to just
mention environmental toxins and the
role they play. The term microplastics
has been very very popular of late. When
we talk about environmental toxins, are
we talking about microplastics in the
air and maybe the water? What do we
mean?
>> Essentially, it's anything in our world
that is impacting your body and how it
functions. There's a few different
types, right? So, we have endocrine
disrupting chemicals. These are actual
toxins in the environment, in cosmetics,
>> cosmetics, our kitchen, our food that
change how our endocrine system works,
our hormones. There's also things like
microplastics like you mentioned, which
are actually going to deposit in our
body and can cause fibrosis even in our
ovaries, therefore changing how an
organ's able to respond even if it is
given normal hormone signals. And then I
also lump into this category behavioral
toxins, right? things like alcohol,
marijuana, cigarettes, the the choices
that are toxic in our world as well. So
that toxins is kind of a large category.
There are some toxins you can control.
You can try to filter your water. You
can learn what is in your water so that
you can say at the, you know, EWG, this
is my zip code. This is what's in my tap
water. What type of filter might I need
to try to have healthier drinking water
in my home? You can change what you're
cooking with, not using non-stick
cookware or teflon. you can get rid of
plastics and especially what you're
putting hot foods and beverages in
because the heat is allowing those
toxins to leak into those things. And
then as Dr. Haber said, our cosmetics,
things that you use every single day
that you put in and on your body are
things that you're having a higher
exposure to. And it's really important
to decrease those because things like
air quality, you might not have as much
control over based on where you live.
And there's so many toxins in our world
in general that it's unrealistic to say,
"Let's avoid all of them." And because
of this, we have that same mentality
that we see with exercise sometimes.
Well, it's just there's too many. I
can't avoid them all. So, I will ignore
this category because it's easier to
just do nothing instead of making active
decisions to start to live a less toxic
life.
>> What changes have you made to remove
pollutants and environmental toxins from
your lives? Because we're in that
fertility journey. I remember I came
home in one day and like all my shampoo
and stuff had gone.
>> Yeah. So my nice stuff is
>> starting to look through your products
and get getting rid of things that have
endocrine disruptors in them. You want
to look the kitchen is probably the
greatest source of exposure for most
people. So there's really no need to
have any plastics in your kitchen. So
getting rid of them. But many people
don't think about when you do have
processed foods. The wrapping, the
container, anything that's coming
packaged likely has toxins in it. When
you order Door Dash and it comes and you
have it in a container, that's often hot
food in a container that is leeching
chemicals into it. So, a simple thing is
take it out of that right away, even if
you're not eating it. Put it into
something glass or a different type of
container. So, you can try to minimize
that exposure. Thinking about hot
beverages, things that go in the
microwave or the dishwasher, especially,
but then other things like thermal
receipts. So, getting receipts, uh,
thermal receipts have BPA in them. So,
getting receipts or
>> receipts. Yeah. So the airline tickets
or that thermal paper. So just the
receipt from the grocery store when they
say, "Stephen, do you want your
receipt?" You can just say, "No." And
then if you work with thermal paper,
maybe you're a cashier and you touch it
over and over. I highly recommend you
wear gloves because your exposure to
that thermal paper is so much higher
that it can become problematic for you.
>> Does it really make a difference if I
take the receipt or not? You know,
there's a lot of things where you can do
that say that person touched receipts
all day and they still got pregnant or
their sperm was great or they lived a
long time. We can list a whole lot of
negative behaviors or habits or
exposures that one person might tolerate
just fine. And for somebody else, the
sum of all of these behaviors add up to
be something that puts them in a place
that is very pro-inflammatory,
not healthy for the now or for the
future. That to me is an easy dec on the
scale of decisions that are hard or that
are easy. Trying to change the things
that you're exposed to in your world.
You have to spend some time to learn
about it. You might have to buy some new
things. But over time, those decisions
are ultimately easier than how you eat,
your exercise. Those those take longer
commitment. And especially if you're
partnered, if you live with somebody,
then the foods that you eat, your
sleeping habits depend on them. You both
have to be together on this. So
sometimes I always say toxins are to one
place a thing you can do. You can look
at your products. You can start to when
they run out say is this one healthy for
me? Should I get something that's going
to have less of an impact? That one time
of using very scented hand wash is no
big deal. But when you wash your hands
with that highly scented hand wash five
times a day over and over, it is just an
avenue of endocrine disruption that can
add up to the litany of the other ones
that you're experiencing. So we're all
saying these little changes on one hand
singularly probably do not matter much,
but together they do.
>> And there's a link between environmental
toxins and menopause or early menopause.
>> Early menopause, we think so. So, you
know, you were born with a shelf life, a
genetically predisposition shelf life on
the ovary. Okay? And we don't know a lot
of things to extend that shelf life cuz
we have a certain number of eggs. But
there are a lot of things we can do to
speed that process up. So, that's going
to be smoking. Women who smoke
cigarettes or, you know, um even we're
looking at vaping now because it's a
newer thing, but definitely tobacco
consumption, you know, in the form of
smoking. We see earlier menopause. um
the so there was this incredible study
where they looked at women who were
sexually abused who then had children
who were sexually abused went through
menopause I think nine years sooner so
and it's the only study that looked at
this and it happened to be the stress
they looked at was sexual abuse in the
mother and the child and so they went
through menopause nine years sooner so
there is a component of emotional stress
and long-term chronic emotional stress
>> it does cause chronic inflam-
And the ovaries are highly sensitive to
chronic inflammation. We know that BPA
exposure has shown that if you have a
higher level of BPA exposure, you have
lower ovarian reserve, meaning less eggs
in your ovary will go into menopause
earlier. And
>> what is BPA?
>> BPA is one of those environmental
chemicals that we're exposed to largely
through plastics, but it's also one
that's in the thermal receipt paper that
we're trying to avoid our exposure to.
And that's where some of the data even
when it comes back to food where soy
intaking soy products can actually be
very protective because it combats BPA.
So how it works. So when people say,
"Oh, you shouldn't have tofu. You're a
man. Soy is so bad for you." That's
actually false. And we found that people
who had greater exposure to soy products
actually had the lowest level of BPA and
improved reproductive performance
because of that. So there's definitely
correlation with these toxins in our
world and we might say, "Oh, is it
linked to menopause? Maybe nobody's done
that exact study, but it absolutely is.
If you have lower eggs at an earlier
time period,
>> that's going to give you an earlier
menopause going." You know, the flip
side of fertility is menopause. So,
>> and lastly, I wanted to talk about
sleep.
>> Well, it's all of our favorites and
we're doing it last.
>> So, yeah, Vonda, I've heard you refer to
sleep as the pillar of everything. Mhm.
>> And I say that because we think sleep is
just passing out like we're not
conscious. Well, that may be true from a
from a uh our viewpoint, but it is the
most regenerative period in our day.
Actually, the brain is processing
information, getting rid of toxins. The
body is able to uh settle and again get
rid of toxins. But many women in midlife
have completely disrupted sleep because
estrogen is critical.
Yes, 80% very high. Um, estrogen is
critical for uh sleep patterns. Um,
many women wake up at 3:37
or thereabouts either with a plummeting
blood sugar or that seems to be around
the time in the middle of the night that
the sleep disruption has. So this broken
up sleep, if you don't do it, then all
the lifestyle things Stacy and the rest
of us have been talking about are nearly
impossible to do if you're
underreovered. And so I have made after
nearly 11 years of not sleeping because
of training and child a religion almost
like I am dedicated to this function. I
do not eat 3 hours before I go to sleep.
Uh, it's one of the primary reasons that
I made the decision to stop drinking
alcohol because that completely
disrupted my sleep. And I am more
conscious of circadian rhythm than I've
ever been in my life. Meaning I go to
bed when I'm except except probably when
I'm traveling, but at the exact same
time every night, but more importantly
get up at the exact same time every day
to start my circadian uh day. um and to
start my adenazine usage so that by 9:30
at night I'm ready to rest. It's that
important.
>> A woman's guide to a aging with power.
Unbreakable.
>> Yes. Unbreakable.
>> And central to that is circadian rhythms
and sleep,
>> right?
>> Yeah. It is because the premise of this
book is that uh women are already
winning the longevity race but we suffer
longer and we have this vision of women
aging which is usually a vision of
frailty. But through the mindset changes
through the behavior such as sleep and
lifting and considering hormones
we can age in a different way. So I'm
trying to re-educate the world that a
woman's destiny is not frailty. A woman
can age powerfully but not if we sit
around and wait for time to make us its
victim. We must be proactive. And sleep
is one component of that. This should be
the very first thing you do. Sleep sets
the stage for your entire day. It's
really that foundation of your health.
If you are going to start the day in a
sleep deficit, you're starting out
stressed, inflamed, insulin resistant.
There's going to be no behaviors you can
do during the day that are going to
overcome the deficit. And we know that
women who get less sleep, they take
longer to get pregnant. They have higher
rates of infertility. We know that men
who get less sleep have lower sperm
parameters and lower testosterone
levels. So if we are saying you Stephen,
you know, what's one thing you might be
able to do? Well, are you sleeping well?
That's one of the first things you can
start to do to say, am I getting 7 to N
hours of good quality sleep? That's not
just time in bed because Mary Cla has
her phone on her. That is actual
sleeping time. And that makes a huge
difference in trying to achieve, you
know, a hormonal health, which is really
what we're all saying here is how do we
get our body in the best quote unquote
balance that we can, which means working
with the different building blocks of
our body in the most optimal way for as
long as possible to be healthy. And even
if we're not looking from a fertility
standpoint, you can't invoke any kind of
metabolic or body composition change
without adequate sleep. So that's what I
mean. It's like when we're talking about
the pillars and sleep being one of the
first things we have to work on, you
can't invoke any kind of change with
>> we're not talking about ambient induced
sleep. No, medication induced sleep
doesn't count.
>> This is not medication induced sleep.
There's a huge percentage of patients
out there who are addicted to these
medications and it has become the only
way that they can sleep.
>> I've been really shocked at several of
the women in my life that are between
the ages of I'm going to say 35. Yeah.
35 and 45 who have like three to four
hours sleep and they appear to be
perfectly fine.
>> They are not. They are not. Their cells
are not fine, Stephen.
>> No.
>> Cuz obviously cuz I do this a lot. I I
learned from all these scientists. But
there's one partic there mean there's
two particular women that I'm very close
to that I actually work with in
different capacities who showed me their
Whoop data and would often tell me they
would say I get three hours four hours
sleep. And I thought there's no way
because she did a 5K this morning at
6:00 a.m. So there's no way she's
getting three to four hours sleep. to
put a sleep tracker on her and she was
getting 3 to 4 hours sleep and her
restorative sleep is like 45 minutes
>> but she's springing into the makeup
chair next to me
>> and she's all she's got all the energy
I'm thinking what the hell is going on
>> youth
>> but I'm younger than her
>> yeah I mean when I was in training I was
getting 3 to 5 hours and getting up and
operating but I cannot do that now
>> if I got 3 to four hours I was good for
the day
>> how
>> because I was 20 years 25 years younger
>> Mhm. M
>> I think we all got through like I was
telling some of my earlier years
>> breastfeeding mother is getting 3 to
four hours you know that is part of the
wow we're built we can function but age
will take that resilience away from us
>> because permenopause causes sleep
fluctuations as well that because of the
change in hormones right
>> exactly
>> and are women just assuming that's
normal and rolling with it or is it okay
>> I think we have more at public education
about how important sleep is and and the
number of hours you need and the quality
of the sleep. So, I think years ago it
was their normal and I'm just going to
keep going, but now they're coming in
saying, "This is a problem."
>> Yep.
>> I need help.
>> And I would be interested to see your
glucose monitor.
>> When you first used it, because that's
how we can kind of navigate sleep, too,
is showing hypoglycemic effects for
women who are exercising in pmenopause
and not eating enough. Melatonin is that
a solution?
>> No,
>> it can be a tool in the toolkit. Most of
the time, you know, most people are
taking too high a dose of melatonin,
which is actually doing more harm than
good.
>> What harm is it doing?
>> Well, it's actually shutting off part of
the brain to be able to help control
their circadian rhythm and then they're
completely dependent upon it. And it's
such an artificial induction, it's going
to w wear out of their system. So your
melatonin is supposed to rise, help you
go to sleep, and then it falls at a rate
for when you're going to wake up so that
when it's lower, you're going to wake up
and your cortisol will naturally rise.
Melatonin can be helpful in very low
doses,
>> like three. Most people are taking 5 to
10.
>> 10. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So I often recommend, you know,
the patients take maybe like a
milligram, but you have to buy a
children's melatonin very often for that
dose of it because people are taking
these huge huge amounts over the
counter. You can just get so much. And
so what you want to make sure is that if
you're using it, you're going to take
melatonin at a time where you're going
to be able to go to sleep about 30
minutes afterward, too. Because people
are also using melatonin and then not
allowing themselves the restful moment
when it's trying to kick in and then
they're taking more or they're staying
up later and they're suppressing their
brain's ability to make their own
melatonin.
>> One of the questions we had from the
audience was from a young girl that
said, a young woman that said, "I'm 24
years old and I struggle so much to fall
asleep. How can I fix my sleeping
naturally if I have disturbed set
circadian rhythm and especially during
my menration my sleeping pattern seems
to get worse.
This one would be interesting to see
like what is her daily like what are her
daily habits if we can kind of bring
calorie intake and all those things back
into the day so she's not phase shifting
and then use things like eltheanine
which is a a nonproin amino acid that
works the GABA right trying to bring
parasympathetic activation back and
making calm down
>> yeah and seeing what is what are your
sleep hygiene habits is your phone out
of your room do you have um like a cool
bedroom. Do you have earplugs to block
out some of the extraneous noises that
might partner doing?
>> Yeah, sleep sleep is really a lifestyle
problem for most people, isn't it?
>> But magnesium can be advantageous as
well, especially if you're on your
menstrual cycle and you're having
menstrual related sleep. So, I think
that's an important thing.
Well, it's just many women run low in
magnesium, especially when your hormones
are very low, especially when your
estrogen and progesterone low, you're
having, you know, contractility of your
uterus, when you're having menstrual
cramps. Magnesium can help counter some
of that and can also help you, if you're
taking it at night, get into a more
restful pattern. So, um I've been
working with a sleep medicine specialist
um and one of the things she points out
which I now discuss with my patients is
listen if we're women wake up in
menopause from hot flashes from night
sweats and then the the relaxation we
get from progesterone is gone so we can
add that back in. So say we we've done
all the things we've given her a touch
of melatonin we've put her on hormones
she is still waking up at 3 in the
morning consistently. Mhm.
>> She deserves a workup for sleep apnea
because women disease differently than
men. And men with sleep apnnea, it's a
very common presentation of snoring.
They're waking up the partner, you know,
all these things. Women are much quieter
about it. They still have the pallet
that falls back and the relaxation. And
that's hormonally driven for a lot of
women. And so they're becoming hypoxic
in the middle of the night from you know
that's one of those side effects of of
having sleep apnea is you stop breathing
and you lo your oxygen levels decline
you become hypoxic but we are not
recognizing it in women more than 50% of
women are going undiagnosed and are
living shorter lives having more
Alzheimer's because of this. So if I
have a patient coming in and we've done
everything and she is still consistently
getting up I'm sending her for a sleep
apnea evaluation. M I've also been
reading literature on um CBT, so
insomnia CBT that they've done with a
lot of veterans and shift workers and
that seems really interesting
>> to help them fall back.
>> Yes. To break the pattern because your
body and your brain learn that wake up
pattern. So if you can reset it,
>> then that's very helpful as well.
>> Yeah.
>> What is the most important thing we
should have talked about that we didn't
talk about? Dr. All right.
>> I think we covered an amazing array of
information, but what I want women to
walk away from this is with there's that
there's a hope
>> for feeling like themselves again.
>> Yeah. and that they are worth
investigating to the ends of the earth
to find the answers they need and not
simply giving up the first time somebody
says no to them or doesn't hear them
when they say that they don't feel like
themselves. They must continue to pursue
it. And number three, that they are
worth the work that it takes to age with
power.
Beautifully said,
Octavia,
>> you really kn do need to be the CEO of
your own healthcare. Um, we have a
medical system that was not built to
serve the aging woman. Um, after
reproduction ends, it's just we become
small men with rust and uteruses to
quote Dr. Sims.
>> And
you, it's okay to educate yourself. It's
okay to read the books. It's okay to go
in educated with checklists and you're
going to probably have to do that and to
go find someone who's educated in the
health of women after reproduction ends.
And that could be your internist. It
could be family medicine. But like
there's no no one owns
menopause life after reproduction ends.
You know, no specialty really owns it.
And so you are going to have to
quarterback this a lot of it yourself
until you find the right partner in this
care. But it is worth it.
>> Beautifully said as well. Yeah, I think
when it comes to your health journey,
nobody is really responsible for it
except you. But there's this idea that
we should wait until things are wrong to
then go get them fixed. And what we are
all trying to do across the spectrum of
you know women's health and their
lifespan is to say many of these things
if we start focusing on them much
earlier and take a preventive approach
which is often against some of these
recommendations about when you should
screen or when you should do testing.
But if we say, well, what is best for
you as an individual? Focus on setting
up a life that is going to help prevent
some of these diseased outcomes. Start
testing things earlier. You're going to
be in a position of power to make the
decisions that are right for you from a
place of education and not be left
making them out of fear or
misinformation or not knowing because
when it women will go through these
stages. Time will make your fertility
decisions for you if you do not. that
that's a fact that your ovaries will
stop functioning. You will go into
menopause. So, we need to both prepare
for our reproductive years, optimize our
fertility the best we can if that's a
life goal for us, but to realize that it
doesn't stop there. That you're have to
prepare for the next stage of the
journey and what that's going to look
like for you. But the steps to take care
of yourself start well before if you're
able to. I look at the the research and
the health outcomes right now for women
and it is a very confusing space. So I
always preface with the fact that I want
women to be empowered and how do you do
that? You can't Google things and find
out. So it's asking questions. It's
sharing information. Most of all taking
up the space because you've earned it. I
get so tired of the rhetoric that women
should be small and demure and be like a
delicate flower and things are happening
to them that they can't control. I want
the narrative to shift. I want people to
say I own the space. I'm taking up the
space and it's my I don't like to use
the word right because it invokes a lot
of angst. But it is your ability to
understand your own body and advocate
for yourself that's going to allow you
to take up that space and get the
answers that you want. I've been
advocating for so many women, myself
included, and the push back that you get
from the medical society is real. It's
not that they necessarily are trying to
gaslight you, but it's just a product of
the system. So, you do have to push
those boundaries. You do have to ask
those hard questions. You do have to go
in prepared to have that push back, but
take that space because everybody
deserves a place at the table and
women's healthcare is being shunted in a
way right now that is really
unacceptable and we need to have ground
swell movement to push back.
>> Thank you all so much.
>> Thank you.
>> I really mean that. I I'm thanking you
on behalf of the many millions of people
that are probably listening to to this
conversation um because you know your
conversations on this show have
delivered more than 30 million downloads
between you so across YouTube and across
audio. I was looking at the numbers and
it's staggering and you think about the
impact of reaching potentially 30
million people just on this show in long
form and then their friends and then
their family and then the advice that
they give to everybody they know and
that domino effect is causing this
wonderful ripple across the planet and
it's turning the lights on in different
households and within families and
amongst business owners like myself so
that we can all cater to the the plight
I guess of women's health in a more
effective way cuz you know even as a man
I've learned oh god so much from you for
>> great
>> and the impact it's had on my life
through improving how I show up for the
women in my life but also the the way
that I'm able to
respond and support my partner, my
sister, my mother in difficult times has
been profound and I think some you know
and well done to all the men that have
listened to this conversation and have
gotten to this stage because I know you
don't kind of you often don't think it's
a problem that you're going to deal with
but when 51% or 52% of the planet are
women is going to be a huge part of your
life whether as a as you having
daughters or sisters or or mothers and
through all of the work that you've done
I've been able to understand the women
in my life better and actually that's
protected my relationships and if it's
protected my relationships it's
protecting me and um I've really noticed
that I've noticed how I've changed
especially through understanding the
menstrual cycle um how I treat treat my
partner but but it's you four you are
like the avengers of what you do. You're
the you're the very best in your
industries and um
>> drink it.
>> I highly recommend everybody goes and
checks out. I'm going to link all of
your books below. Uh Unbreakable, the
fertility formula, the new menopause. I
believe you've got a new book on the way
menopause.
>> The new permenopause. I'll link that as
well if it's available for pre-order and
raw, but also just your you'll make
content, have Instagram pages, and have
websites. So, all of that will be linked
in the description below. And if you
want to go deeper on these subjects that
we've talked about today, then those are
the doorways into a a deeper
understanding. I appreciate you all so
so much.
>> We've been for what 9 hours now and uh
>> I'm sure it's a lot of people. So
>> thank you.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.